Vehicle Color Recognition using Convolutional
Neural Network
Reza Fuad Rachmadiand I Ketut Eddy Purnamay
Department of Multimedia and Networking Engineering
Institut Teknologi Sepuluh Nopember, Surabaya, Indonesia 60111
Email:fuad@its.ac.id,yketut@te.its.ac.id
Abstract —Vehicle color information is one of the important
elements in ITS (Intelligent Trafﬁc System). In this paper, we
present a vehicle color recognition method using convolutional
neural network (CNN). Naturally, CNN is designed to learn
classiﬁcation method based on shape information, but we proved
that CNN can also learn classiﬁcation based on color distribution.
In our method, we convert the input image to two different
color spaces, HSV and CIE Lab, and run it to some CNN
architecture. The training process follow procedure introduce by
Krizhevsky, that learning rate is decreasing by factor of 10 after
some iterations. To test our method, we use publicly vehicle color
recognition dataset provided by Chen. The results, our model
outperform the original system provide by Chen with 2% higher
overall accuracy.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Intelligent Transport System (ITS) is a system that manages
transportation from trafﬁc management to law enforcement.
One important object that widely explored by ITS is a vehicle
and their properties, including type, color, and license plate.
Vehicle color is an important property for vehicle identiﬁcation
and provide visual cues for fast action law enforcement. Rec-
ognize vehicle color is very challenging task because several
factors including weather condition, quality of video/image
acquisition, and strip combination of the vehicle. The ﬁrst
factor, weather condition, may dramatically change the color
illumination of the acquisition image. For example, if the
image/video taken at haze condition then there a lot of ”soft”
white noise added to the image. Soft white noise means that the
noise is not random but continues and blended with the fore-
ground and background objects. The quality of video/image
acquisition is affected the ﬁnal decision of the vehicle color
recognition system and its depends of the optical sensor in
the camera. Camera that can capture object at high speed is
recommended for ITS, but not all installed camera in the road
can do that. A lot of cameras installed in the road only used
to monitor the trafﬁc, pedestrians, and street conditions. The
last factor is strip combination of the vehicle, which is very
affected to the vehicle recognition system. Region selection is
very important to tackle the problem.
There are some research paper published to tackle vehicle
color recognition problem, like in [1], [2], [6], [8], [9]. Chen et
al. [2] use feature context and linear SVM classiﬁer to tackle
the problem. Feature context is a collection of histogram that
build with several areas, like spatial pyramid structure but with
different region conﬁguration. In other paper [6], they try to
tackle vehicle color recognition problem using 2D histogramwith some ROI conﬁguration as features and neural network
as classiﬁer. Baek et al. [8] also use 2D histogram but without
ROI conﬁguration and SVM as classiﬁer. Another approach
is described by Son et al. [9] which using convolution kernel
to extract similarity between positive and negative images and
then feed up those similarity score to SVM classiﬁer.
Color spaces are very important to color recognition ap-
plications, like vehicle color recognition. The selection of
color space will impact the recognition performance. The most
usable color space in digital photography is RGB color space,
but RGB color space has problem to color recognition because
channel of RGB color space contribute equal for each channel
so to distinct color is more difﬁcult. Usually, researcher will
not use RGB as their primary color space and convert it to
other color spaces that separate illumination and color, like
CIE Lab or HSV [6], [8], [9]. Another approach is to make
2D histogram of two channels, like H and S channel in HSV
color space, and do classiﬁcation using those 2D histogram.
In this paper, we present vehicle color recognition method
using convolutional neural network (CNN). CNN is type of
neural network but instead of using fully connected layer,
CNN use layer called convolution layer to extract features
from data. The training mechanism is very similar to normal
neural network and use stochastic gradient descent as training
algorithm. CNN is become very popular after winning the
ILSVRC (ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Chal-
lenge) 2012 [5]. In those paper, they use more than 600,000
neuron and 7 hidden layer to provide good model of the
data. To avoid overﬁtting Krizhevsky et al. [5] employed
regularization method called dropout to the fully connected
layer [3]. The Krizhevsky model is huge and as reported in
the paper, the model trained in six day for 450,000 iteration in
GPU hardware. Before going into details, in section two we
describe detils related works in color recognition. Section two
describe details architecture of our CNN model. Section three
reports the experiments we have done and discuss the results.
II. R ELATED WORKS
There are several research that try to tackle vehicle color
recognition problem including in [1], [2], [6], [8], [9]. The
newest research is describe by Chen et al. [2] in 2014 and
Hsieh et al. [1] in 2015. Chen et al. use feature context
(FC) with selected conﬁguration to divide the images into
subregions, create histogram for each subregion, and learned
it using linear SVM. Not all value in histogram is used to
classify the vehicle color but the values clustered to formarXiv:1510.07391v3  [cs.CV]  15 Aug 2018Fig. 1. The CNN architecture used in our system consist 8 layers with 2 base networks with total 16 layers. First two layers and ﬁfth layer does normalization
and pooling after convolution process. The third and fourth layer does only convolution process. Before feed up to fully-connected layers, the networks do
channel concatenation process. Sample of input image is taken from Chen [2] dataset.
codebook for the problem and then choose the codebook as
feature for the classiﬁer. This mechanism know as Bag-of-
Word (BoW) method. Chen et al. done preprocessing using
haze removal method [7] and color contrast normalization
method. The accuracy of system proposed by Chen et al. is
very high, over 92%.
Another paper by Hsieh et al. [1] proposed color correction
using background image and two frame image of car. Not only
color correction method, Hsieh et al. also proposed window
removal method that remove the window part of the car images
and classify vehicle color using lower part, like bumper and
doors, of the car. The window removal done by taking the
orientation of the car, ﬁt the detail segmented car image by
ellipse shape and cut a half of the ellipse. Hsieh et al. done
the experiments using three different classiﬁer, G-Classiﬁer,
DC-Classiﬁer, and DG-Classiﬁer. G-Classiﬁer responsible for
classify gray and non-gray color. The method is very simple
threshold method with assumption that for gray color the
avarage of three channel, RGB, is very close with color value
of each channel. The DC-Classiﬁer and DG-Classiﬁer trained
using SVM with features extracted from RGB and CIE Lab
color space. Red, green, blue, and yellow color class classiﬁed
using DC-Classiﬁer and the rest of the color class classiﬁed
using DG-Classiﬁer. From the experiments, Hsieh et al. report
that the average accuracy for the system is 93,59% with 7
color class including black, silver, white, yellow, red, green,
and blue.
FC also used by Dule et al. [6] to tackle vehicle color
recognition problem. The different between FC used by Chen
et al. and Dule et al. is that Dule et al. only used two ROI
(smooth hood peace and semi front vehicle). ROI is selected
automatically using plate detection method and otsu threshold-
ing to search smooth hood peace and heuristic approach for
semi front vehicle. The classiﬁer used by Dule et al. are K-
NN, ANN, and SVM. The best accuracy that reported in Dule
et al. paper is 83,5% with conﬁguration of 8 bin histogram,
several combination of color spaces, and ANN classiﬁer.Other approach for vehicle color recognition problem is
classify vehicle color using 2D histogram features. Baek et
al. [8] proposed the vehicle color recognition system using
2D histogram features and SVM classiﬁer. Hue and saturation
in HSV color space is used for creating the 2D histogram.
From the experiments, the average accuracy of the system is
94,92%. The dataset used in the experiment has 500 outdoor
vehicle images with ﬁve color class including black, white,
red, yellow, and blue color class.
Son et al. [9] proposed other possible approach for color
recognition using similirity method. The system using grid ker-
nel that run on hue and saturation channel of HSV color space.
The same dataset as in [8] is used in the experiments. Son et al.
reported only precission and recall for each color class. The
percentage of precission and recall from the experiments is
very high and close to 100%. High precission and high recall
indicate that the model has good accuracy.
III. T HECNN A RCHITECTURE
The architecture of our CNN can viewed in ﬁgure 1. Our
CNN architecture consists 2 base networks and 8 layers for
each base network with total 16 layers. The ﬁrst two layers
of our CNN architecture is a convlutional layer and it does
convolution process following by normalization and pooling.
Convolutional layer is a layer that do convolution process that
same as convolution process in image processing algorithm.
ForIiis an input image and his a some convolution kernel,
output image for convolution process Iocan be written as
Io[m;n] =1X
j= 11X
i= 1Ii[i;j]:h[m;n] (1)
with [m;n]is pixel value at coordinate (m;n). Training pro-
cess of CNN will learn h, may called as kernel, as parameters
of convolutional layer. The choice of activation function in
convolutional layer have huge impact for the networks. There a
several choice of activation function including tanh andReLU(Rectiﬁed Linear Unit). In our CNN networks we use ReLU
activation function for all layers including the fully-connected
layers. The normalization process done by following equation
2 with= 10 4,= 0:75, andn= 5.
li
x;y=ki
x;y=
1 +
ni+n=2X
j=i n=2(ki
x;y)2
(2)
withli
x;yis normalization result and ki
x;yis output of layer
activation function for convolution at coordinate (x;y). Using
those normalization, the accuracy of CNN increase about 2%
according to [5]. The last process in two ﬁrst layers is pooling
process. There are two type of pooling, max pooling and mean
pooling. Each type has different approach, max pooling will
take maximum respon from the convolutional process which is
shape with sharp edges and mean pooling will take the average
of the convolutional process respon which is summarize the
shape in neighborhood. In our CNN architecture, we use max
pooling with size 3x3 and stride 2 for overlapping pooling.
The second, fourth and ﬁfth layer are grouping into two group
which each group is independent each others. The third and
fourth layer is also a convolutional layer but without pooling
and normalization process. Output of third and fourth layer is
same as input because we use 3x3 kernel with pad 1 added for
each border. The ﬁfth layer is convolutional layer with only
pooling process without normalization.
Before going into a fully-connected layers, the pooling
output of the ﬁfth layer from two base networks is concatenate
and ﬂattened into one long vector. The sixth and seventh layer
is a fully-connected layer employed dropout regularization
method to reduce overﬁtting. The last layer is the softmax
regression layer which can describe in the following equation
p(y(i)=jjx(i);) =eT
jx(i)
Pk
l=1eT
lx(i)(3)
withp(y(i)=jjx(i);)is probability of y(i)being class j
given input x(i)with weight parameter .
Overall, our CNN architecture consists 2 base networks,
8 layers each with total 16 layers. First layer use 11x11@3
kernel with total 48 kernels, second layer use 3x3@48 kernel
with total 128 kernels, third use 3x3@128 kernel with total
192 kernels, fourth layer use 3x3@192 kernel with total 192
kernels, and ﬁfth layer use 3x3@192 with total 128 kernels.
Pooling process is employed in ﬁrst, second, and ﬁfth layer
with same parameter, pooling size of 3x3 with 2 pixel stride.
Sixth, seventh, and eight layers is fully-connected layers with
each 4096-4096-8 neuron with dropout regularization method
employed in sixth and seventh layer. The network’s input is
a 3 channel image with 150,228 dimensional or 227x227@3
resolution. Total neuron involved in the networks is 658,280
neurons.
IV. T HEEXPERIMENTS
A. Training Process
Our models trained using stochastic gradient descent with
115 examples per batch, momentum of 0.9 and weight decay of
0.0005. For the experiments, we use Chen dataset [2] and some
sample images of the dataset can be viewed in ﬁgure 2. The
Fig. 2. Sample images from Chen dataset [2]. Some images are suffering
from noise and brightness constancy.
dataset contains 15601 vehicle images with 8 classes of vehicle
color, which are black, blue, cyan, gray, green, red, white,
and yellow. In the training process, half of class examples
are used. Each example is resized into 256x256@3 resolution
with certain color spaces. We use four different color spaces,
RGB, CIE Lab, CIE XYZ, and HSV . Before the data processed
for training, it cropped to 227x227@3 and subtracted by
mean image of the training data. In training process the data
randomly mirrored to increase the classiﬁer accuracy. We use
learning rate of 0.01 and reduced continuously by a factor of
10 at multiple iteration of 50,000 with maximum iteration of
200,000. We use caffe framework [4] to implement our models.
The weights of the networks are initialized using a gaussian
function with = 0:01for connecting weights and ﬁxed value
of0:1for bias value.
The stochastic gradient descent method, SGD for short,
is an optimization method that want to ﬁnd minimum or
maximum value of some function. SGD will work for all
function that have gradient or ﬁrst derivative. Usually the
system use SGD for minimizing the error or loss function and
update the weight parameters based on following function
wi+1=wi rL(z;wi) (4)
withwiis current weight parameters, is learning rate, and
rL(z;wi)is the gradient of loss function Lwith respect to
input examples z. For faster model convergence, the weight
decay and momentum are added to the update equation. The
ﬁnal equation of update function in SGD method is describe
following
wi+1=
wi+ (1 
)( rL(z;wi) (5)
wi+1=wi rL(z;wi) wi (6)
with
is momentum variable and is weight decay. Changing
momentum and weight decay may accelerate the training
process.
The training process done in GPU hardware to reduce the
training time. Our GPU hardware consists 14 multiprocessor
within 3 GB memory. There are two limitations of our GPU
hardware for training process, the memory limiting the size ofTABLE I. A CCURACY OF OUR MODELS WITH 4DIFFERENT COLOR
SPACES AND ACCURACY FROM CHEN ET AL . [2] FOR COMPARATION .
Color Space
Color Class RGB HSV CIE Lab CIE XYZChen et
al. [2]
yellow 0.9794 0.9450 0.9656 0.9828 0.9553
white 0.9666 0.9624 0.9561 0.9649 0.9423
blue 0.9410 0.9576 0.9410 0.9484 0.9535
cyan 0.9645 0.9716 0.9645 0.9716 0.9787
red 0.9897 0.9866 0.9897 0.9886 0.9878
gray 0.8608 0.8503 0.8668 0.8647 0.8466
black 0.9738 0.9703 0.9703 0.9709 0.9730
green 0.8257 0.8215 0.8215 0.7676 0.7884
average 0.9447 0.9372 0.9414 0.9432 0.9282
TABLE II. E XECUTION TIME FOR OUR MODEL USING CPU AND GPU
HARDWARE .
CPU
(1 core)GPU
(448 cores)
Initialization time 4.849 s 4.849 s
Execution time 3.248 s 0.156 s
the networks or the batch size used in the training process and
the maximum dimension of the grid block execution (parallel
execution conﬁguration) also limiting the batch size used in
the training process. The training process taken over 2 GB
GPU memory for the data and the networks with 4 days of
execution time.
B. Results and Discussion
For testing purpose, we use 50% examples of dataset that
not used in the training process. Table I summarize our testing
results with four different color spaces and compare the results
with the system provide by Chen et al. [2]. Each class consists
different number of examples from 141 to 2371. From table I,
it can see that RGB color space achieve the highest accuracy
of the testing process with average accuracy of 94,47%. Four
color spaces used in the models have high accuracy, more than
90%, with narrow deviation. The results show that our CNN
model outperform the original system of dataset provide by
Chen et al. [2]. Our models outperform Chen et al. system in
yellow, white, blue, red, gray, black, and green color class.
Only on cyan color class our system had lower accuracy
comparing to the Chen et al. system but with different only
0.7%. Figure 3 is a confusion matrix for our model using RGB
color space. The confusion matrix shows that the most worst
accuracy of our model is in green and gray color class. Some
examples of green class is misclassiﬁed as gray class and its
above 10%. As seen in the dataset, some green color class
examples has color that very close to gray, more like green-
gray color than green, so the classiﬁer may have it wrong
classiﬁed as a gray color class. The same case appears in gray
color class which some gray color class examples misclassiﬁed
as white color class. Thus may appears because of very bright
Fig. 3. Confusion matrix from our model with RGB color space. Each cell
describe accuracy for each class measure in percentage.
sunlight reﬂection on metallic paint or the color is too light so
it’s very close to another color as well.
Another issue to tackle is execution time used to classify
vehicle color. We implement the models using two different
hardware, the ﬁrst one the model running on 1 core CPU and
the second one the model running on 448 cores GPU with
NVIDIA Tesla C2050. Table II summarize average execution
time for all testing examples. As shown in table II, the models
that run on GPU have more than 20x faster than the models
that run on CPU, so the issue of execution time is solved
if the models running on appropriate hardware conﬁguration.
The initialization time is a time for the system to prepare
the model, load it to the memory, and load mean image. For
the practical implementation, we recommend using the client
server mechanism, send the vehicle detection result to the
server, do the vehicle color classiﬁcation in server backend
using GPU hardware, and send back the result to the Intelligent
Transportation System for further processing.
To see how our models capturing color information in the
data, we visualize a several layer of our CNN models. The
ﬁrst convolutional layer is an important part of the network
to extract low-level features. Figure 4 is a visualization of all
kernels in the ﬁrst convolutional layer and an example output
of the pooling process in layer conv1 and conv2 of our CNN
architecture. As seen in ﬁgure 4, the ﬁrst convolutional layer
capture rich color features in the input image. All vehicle color
variations in dataset are present in the kernels. The kernels
from network 1, ﬁgure 4a, capture a lot of cyan-like color.
Cyan-like color that appears in the kernel may contribute to
the red color class or cyan color class. Another color that
appears repeatedly in the kernel are red-blue color, green-
gray color, and orange-like color. For further investigation,
we capture respond from convolutional layer continuing with
normalization and pooling process and it can see in ﬁgure 4c.
We test our models using one of the test images and try to
analyze the behaviour of our models. Figure 4c show that for
yellow color class a lot of the green-like color kernel neuron(a) Kernel from network 1
 (b) Kernel from network 2
 (c) Output example from pooling process
Fig. 4. 96 kernel with 11x11@3 resolution learned by our ﬁrst convolutional layer with input resolution 224x224@3 and output example from pooling process.
(a) 48 kernel from network 1, (b) 48 kernel from network 2, (c) output from pooling process in layer conv1 and conv2.
is active and its looks like our models learned that color can
be recognize from the hood color or the top color of the car.
This behaviour occurs because most all of the images in dataset
take image of the front of the car from some height and a little
deviation of angle, so the side of the car is not cover very much.
The camera conﬁguration of taken images in dataset simulate
the CCTV or other street camera that relatively used such that
conﬁguration.
V. C ONCLUSION
In the paper, we present the vehicle color recognition sys-
tem using convolutional neural network. Our model succesfully
capturing vehicle color in very high accuracy, 94,47%, and
outperform the original system provide by Chen [2]. From
the experiment, the best accuracy is achieve using RGB color
space and this is contradictive with several papers that not
recomend RGB color space for color recognition and using
another color space like HSV or YUV . Execution time for our
models is about 3 s for CPU (1 core) and 0.156 s for GPU
(448 cores), although the execution time is slower than system
provide by Chen [2] but its still can be used for practical
implementation with several adjustment.
REFERENCES
[1] J.-W. Hsieh, L.-C. Chen, S.-Y . Chen, D.-Y . Chen, S. Alghyaline, and
H.-F. Chiang, Vehicle Color Classiﬁcation Under Different Lighting
Conditions Through Color Correction , IEEE Sensors Journal, 2015, V ol:
15, Issue: 2, pp: 971–983.
[2] P. Chen, X. Bai and W. Liu, Vehicle Color Recognition on an Urban Road
by Feature Context , IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation
Systems (TITS), 2014, Issue: 99, pp: 1-7.
[3] N. Srivastava, G. E. Hinton, A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and R.
Salakhutdinov, Dropout: A Simple Way to Prevent Neural Networks from
Overﬁtting , Journal of Machine Learning Research 15 (2014), pp: 1929–
1958.
[4] Y . Jia, E. Shelhamer, J. Donahue, S. Karayev, J. Long, R. Girshick, S.
Guadarrama, and T. Darrell, Caffe: Convolutional Architecture for Fast
Feature Embedding , ACM International Conference on Multimedia 2014,
pp: 675–678.
[5] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, ImageNet Classiﬁcation
with Deep Convolutional Neural Networks , NIPS 2012, pp: 1097–1105.
[6] E. Dule, M. Gokmen, M. S. Beratoglu, A convenient feature vector con-
struction for vehicle color recognition , Proc. 11th WSEAS International
Conference on Neural Networks, Evolutionary Computing and Fuzzy
systems, pp: 250255, (2010)[7] K. He, J. Sun, and X. Tang, Single image haze removal using dark
channel prior , in Proc. IEEE Conf. CVPR, 2009, pp: 19561963.
[8] N. Baek, S.-M. Park, K.-J. Kim, and S.-B. Park, Vehicle Color Clas-
siﬁcation Based on the Support Vector Machine Method , International
Conference on Intelligent Computing, ICIC 2007, pp: 1133–1139.
[9] J.-W. Son, S.-B. Park, and K.-J. Kim, A convolutional kernel method
for color recognition , International Conference on Advanced Language
Processing and Web Information Technology (ALPIT 2007), pp: 242-
247.
DATA STRUCTURE AND ALGORITHM  
Unit I  
Arrays and sequential representations – ordered lists – Stacks and Queues – Evaluation 
ofExpressions – Multiple Stacks and Queues – Singly Linked List – Linked Stacks and 
queues – Polynomial addition.  
Data Structure Introduction:  
The data structure name indicates itself that organizing the data in memory. 
There are many ways of organizing the data in the memory as we have already seen 
one of the data structures, i.e., a rray in C language. Array is a collection of memory 
elements in which data is stored sequentially, i.e., one after another. In other words, 
we can say that array stores the elements in a continuous manner. This organization 
of data is done with the help of  an array of data structures. There are also other ways 
to organize the data in memory. To structure the data in memory, 'n' number of 
algorithms were proposed, and all these algorithms are known as Abstract data 
types.  These abstract data types are the se t of rules.   
 
 
Types of Data Structures  
There are two types of data structures:  
o Primitive data structure  
o Non-primitive data structure  
Primitive Data structure  
The primitive data structures are primitive data types. The i nt, char, float, double, and 
pointer are the primitive data structures that can hold a single value.  
Non-Primitive Data structure  
The non -primitive data structure is divided into two types:  
 Linear data structure  
 Non-linear data structure  
Linear Data Structure  
The arrangement of data in a sequential manner is known as a linear data structure. 
The data structures used for this purpose are Arrays, Linked list, Stacks, and Queues. 
In these data structures, one element is connected to only one another element in a 
linear form.  
Non- Linear Structure:  
When one element is connected to the 'n' number of elements known as a non -
linear data structure. The best example is trees and graphs. In this case, the elements 
are arranged in a random manner.  
Data structures can also be classified as:  
 Static data structure:  It is a type of data structure where the size is allocated 
at the compile time. Therefore, the maximum size is fixed.  
 Dynamic data structure:  It is a type of data structure where the size is  
allocated at the run time. Therefore, the maximum size is flexible.  
Major Operations  
The major or the common operations that can be performed on the data structures 
are: 
o Searching:  We can search for any element in a data structure.  
o Sorting:  We can sort th e elements of a data structure either in an ascending 
or descending order.  
o Insertion:  We can also insert the new element in a data structure.  
o Updation:  We can also update the element, i.e., we can replace the element 
with another element.  
o Deletion:  We can also perform the delete operation to remove the element 
from the data structure.  
Advantages of Data structures  
The following are the advantages of a data structure:  o Efficiency:  If the choice of a data structure for implementing a particular ADT 
is prop er, it makes the program very efficient in terms of time and space.  
o Reusability:  The data structure provides reusability means that multiple client 
programs can use the data structure.  
o Abstraction:  The data structure specified by an ADT also provides the l evel of 
abstraction. The client cannot see the internal working of the data structure, 
so it does not have to worry about the implementation part. The client can 
only see the interface.  
Arrays and Sequential Representation  
Definition  
o Arrays are defined as the collection of similar type of data items stored at contiguous 
memory locations.  
o Arrays are the derived data type in C programming language which can store the 
primitive type of data such as int, char, double, float, etc.  
o Array is the simplest data structure where each data element can be randomly 
accessed by using its index number.  
o For example, if we want to store the marks of a student in 6 subjects, then we don't 
need to define different variable for the marks in differe nt subject. instead of that, we 
can define an array which can store the marks in each subject at a the contiguous 
memory locations.  
The array  marks[10]  defines the marks of the student in 10 different subjects where 
each subject marks are located at a part icular subscript in the array 
i.e. marks[0]  denotes the marks in first subject,  marks[1]  denotes the marks in 2nd 
subject and so on.  
Properties of the Array  
1. Each element is of same data type and carries a same size i.e. int = 4 bytes.  
2. Elements of the array  are stored at contiguous memory locations where the first 
element is stored at the smallest memory location.  
3. Elements of the array can be randomly accessed since we can calculate the address of 
each element of the array with the given base address and the  size of data element.  
Advantages of Array  
o Array provides the single name for the group of variables of the same type therefore, 
it is easy to remember the name of all the elements of an array.  
o Traversing an array is a very simple process, we just need to increment the base 
address of the array in order to visit each element one by one.  
o Any element in the array can be directly accessed by using the index.  Memory Allocation of the array  
As we have mentioned, all the data elements of an array are stored at 
contiguous locations in the main memory. The name of the array represents 
the base address or the address of first element in the main memory. Each 
element of the array is represented by a proper indexing . 
The indexing of the array can be defined in three wa ys. 
1. 0 (zero - based indexing) : The first element of the array will be arr[0].  
2. 1 (one - based indexing) : The first element of the array will be arr[1].  
3. n (n - based indexing) : The first element of the array can reside at any random index 
number.  
In the following image, we have shown the memory allocation of an array arr of size 
5. The array follows 0 -based indexing approach. The base address of the array is 
100th byte. This will be the address of arr[0]. Here, the size of int is 4 bytes therefore 
each el ement will take 4 bytes in the memory.  
 
 
 
In 0 based indexing, If the size of an array is n then the maximum index number, an 
element can have is  n-1. However, it will be n if we use  1 based indexing.  
Accessing Elements  of an array  
To access any random element of an array we need the following information:  
1. Base Address of the array.  
2. Size of an element in bytes.  
3. Which type of indexing, array follows.  
Address of any element of a 1D array can be calculated by using the foll owing 
formula:  
        Byte  address  of element  A[i]  = base  address  + size * ( i - first index  ) 
2D Array  
2D array can be defined as an array of arrays. The 2D array is organized as matrices 
which can be represented as the collection of rows and columns.  
However, 2D arrays are created to implement a relational database look alike data 
structure. It provides ease of holding bulk of data at once which can be passed to 
any number of functions wherever required.  
How to declare 2D Array  
The syntax of declaring two dimensional array is very much similar to 
that of a one dimensional array, given as follows.  
1. int arr[max_rows][max_columns];     
however, It produces the data structure which looks like following.  
25M  
 
 
Above image s hows the two dimensional array, the elements are organized in the form of 
rows and columns. First element of the first row is represented by a[0][0] where the number 
shown in the first index is the number of that row while the number shown in the second 
index is the number of the column.  
How do we access data in a 2D array  
Similar to one dimensional arrays, we can access the individual cells in a 
2D array by using the indices of the cells. There are two indices attached 
to a particular cell, one is its row number while the other is its column 
number.  
However, we can store the value stored in any particular cell of a 2D array to some 
variable x by using the following syntax.  
1. int x = a[i][j];     
where i and j is the row and column number of the cell respectively.  
We can assign each cell of a 2D array to 0 by using the following code:  
1. for ( int i=0; i<n ;i++)    
2. {   
3.     for (int j=0; j<n; j++)    
4.     {   
5.         a[i][j]  = 0;    
6.     }   
7. }   
Initializing 2D Arrays  
We know  that, when we declare and initialize one dimensional array in C 
programming simultaneously, we don't need to specify the size of the 
array. However this will not work with 2D arrays. We will have to define 
at least the second dimension of the array.  
 
The syntax to declare and initialize the 2D array is given as follows.  
1. int arr[2][2] = {0,1,2,3};    
The number of elements that can be present in a 2D array will always be equal to 
(number of rows * number of columns ). 
Mapping 2D array to 1D array  
When it com es to map a 2 dimensional array, most of us might think that why this mapping is 
required. However, 2 D arrays exists from the user point of view. 2D arrays are created to 
implement a relational database table lookalike data structure, in computer memory, the 
storage technique for 2D array is similar to that of an one dimensional array.  The size of a two dimensional array is equal to the multiplication of number of rows and the 
number of columns present in the array. We do need to map two dimensional array to the one 
dimensional array in order to store them in the memory.  
A 3 X 3 two dimensional array is shown in the following image. However, this array 
needs to be mapped to a one dimensional array in order to store it into the memory.  
 
 
 
There are two main techniques of storing 2D array elements into memory  
1. Row Major ordering  
In row major ordering, all the rows of the 2D array are stored into the memory 
contiguously. Considering the array shown in the above image, its memory allocation 
according to row major order is shown as follows.  
 
 
 
first, the 1st row of the array is stored into the memory completely, then the 2nd row 
of the arr ay is stored into the memory completely and so on till the last row.  
 
 
 
2. Column Major ordering  
According to the column major ordering, all the columns of the 
2D array are stored into the memory contiguously. The memory 
allocation of the array which is shown in in the above image is 
given as follows.  
 
first, the 1st column of the array is stored into the memory completely, then the 
2nd row of the array is stored into the memory completel y and so on till the last 
column of the array.  
 
 
 
Calculating the Address of the random element of a 2D array  
Due to the fact that, there are two different techniques of storing the two 
dimensional array into the memory, there are two different formulas to calculate the 
address of a random element of the 2D array.  
By Row Major Order  
If array is declared by a[m][n] where m is the number of rows while n is the number 
of columns, then address of an element a[i][j]  of the array stored in row major order 
is calculated as,  
1. Address(a[i][j])  = B. A. + (i * n + j) * size    
     where, B. A. is the base address or the address of the first element of the array a[0][0] .  
Example :  
1. a[10...30, 55...75], base address  of the array  (BA) = 0, size of an element  = 4 bytes  .    
2. Find the location  of a[15][68].    
3.    
4. Address(a[ 15][68]) = 0 +    
5. ((15 - 10) x (68 - 55 + 1) + (68 - 55)) x 4   
6.    
7. = (5 x 14 + 13) x 4   
8. = 83 x 4    
9. = 332 answer     
By Column major order  
If array is declared by a[m][n] where m is the number of rows while n is the number 
of columns, then address of an element a[i][j] of the array stored in row major order 
is calculated as,  
1. Address(a[i][j])  = ((j*m)+i)*Size  + BA    
where BA is the base addre ss of the array.  
Example:  
A [-
5 ... +20][20 ... 70], BA = 1020 , Size of element  = 8 bytes.  Find the location  of a[0][30].    
   
Address  [A[0][30]) = ((30-20) x 24 + 5)  x 8 + 1020    =  245 x 8 + 1020  = 2980  bytes     
 
Ordered  list 
       An ordered list is a list in which the order of the items is significant. 
However, the items in an ordered list are not necessarily sorted. 
Consequently, it is possible to change the order o items and still have a 
valid ordered list.  
Consider a list of the  titles of the chapters in this book. The order of the 
items in the list corresponds to the order in which they appear in the book. 
However, since the chapter titles are not sorted alphabetically, we cannot 
consider the list to be sorted. Since it is possi ble to change the order of the 
chapters in book, we must be able to do the same with the items of the list. 
As a result, we may insert an item into an ordered list at any position.  
A searchable container is a container that supports the following additiona l 
operations:  
Insert  
  -used to put objects into a the container;  
withdraw  
-used to remove objects from the container;  
find 
-used to locate objects in the container;  isMember  
-used to test whether a given object instance is in the container.  
stack  
 
A real -world stack allows operations at one end only. For example, we can place or 
remove a card or plate from the top of the stack only. At any given time, we can only 
access the top element of a stack.  
This feature makes it LIFO data structure. LIFO stan ds for Last -in-first-out. Here, 
the element which is placed (inserted or added) last, is accessed first. In stack 
terminology, insertion operation is called  PUSH  operation and removal operation is 
called  POP  operation.  
Stack Representation  
The following diagram depicts a stack and its operations −  
     
A stack can be implemented by means of Array, Structure,  Pointer, and Linked List. 
Stack can either be a fixed size one or it may have a sense of dynamic resizing. 
Here, we are going to implement stack using arrays, which makes it a fixed size 
stack implementation.  
Basic Operations  
Stack operations may involve initializing the stack, using it and then de -initializing it. 
Apart from these basic stuffs, a stack is used for the following two primary 
operations −  
 push()  − Pushing (storing) an element on the stack.  
 pop()  − Removing (accessing) an element from the sta ck. 
When data is PUSHed onto stack.  
To use a stack efficiently, we need to check the status of stack as well. For the 
same purpose, the following functionality is added to stacks −  
 peek()  − get the top data element of the stack, without removing it.  
 isFull () − check if stack is full.  
 isEmpty()  − check if stack is empty.  
At all times, we maintain a pointer to the last PUSHed data on the stack. 
The top pointer provides top value of the stack without actually removing it.  
First we should learn about procedures  to support stack functions −  
peek()  
Algorithm of peek() function −  
begin procedure peek  
   return stack[top]  
end procedure  
isfull()  
Algorithm of isfull() function −  
begin procedure isfull  
 
   if top equals to MAXSIZE  
      return true 
   else 
      return false 
   endif 
    
end procedure  
isempty()  
Algorithm of isempty() function −  
begin procedure isempty  
 
   if top less than 1 
      return true 
   else 
      return false 
   endif 
    
end procedure  
Implementation of isempty() function in C programming language is slightly 
different. We initialize top at -1, as the index in array starts from 0. So we check if 
the top is below zero or -1 to determine if the stack is empty. Here's the code −  
Push Operat ion 
The process of putting a new data element onto stack is known as a Push 
Operation. Push operation involves a series of steps −  
 Step 1  − Checks if the stack is full.  
 Step 2  − If the stack is full, produces an error and exit.   Step 3  − If the stack is not  full, increments  top to point next empty space.  
 Step 4  − Adds data element to the stack location, where top is pointing.  
 Step 5  − Returns success.  
If the linked list is used to implement the stack, then in step 3, we need to allocate 
space dynamically.  
Algorithm for PUSH Operation  
A simple algorithm for Push operation can be derived as follows −  
begin procedure push : stack, data 
 
   if stack is full 
      return null 
   endif 
    
   top ← top + 1 
   stack[top] ← data 
 
end procedure  
Pop Operation  
Accessing the content while removing it from the stack, is known as a Pop 
Operation. In an array implementation of pop() op eration, the data element is not 
actually removed, instead  top is decremented to a lower position in the stack to 
point to the next value. But in linked -list implementation, pop() actually removes 
data element and deallocates memory space.  
A Pop operation may involve the following steps −  
 Step 1  − Checks if the stack is empty.  
 Step 2  − If the stack is empty, produces an error and exit.  
 Step 3  − If the stack is not empty, accesses the data element at which  top is 
pointing.  
 Step 4  − Decreases the value of top by 1.  
 Step 5  − Returns success.  
Algorithm for Pop Operation  
A simple algorithm for Pop operation can be derived as follows −  
begin procedure pop : stack 
 
   if stack is empty 
      return null 
   endif 
       data ← stack[top] 
   top ← top - 1 
   return data 
 
end procedure  
 
Queue  
Queue is an abstract data structure, somewhat similar to Stacks. Unlike stacks, a queue is 
open at both its ends. One end is always used to insert data (enqueue) and the other is used 
to remove data (dequeue). Queue follows First -In-First-Out methodology, i.e., the data item 
stored first will be accessed first.  
 
Queue Representation  
As we now understand that in queue, we access both ends for different reasons. 
The following diagram given below tries to explain queue representation as data 
structure −  
  
 
Basic Op erations  
Queue operations may involve initializing or defining the queue, utilizing it, and then 
completely erasing it from the memory. Here we shall try to understand the basic 
operations associated with queues −  
 enqueue()  − add (store) an item to the queue.  
 dequeue()  − remove (access) an item from the queue.  
Few more functions are required to make the above -mentioned queue operation 
efficient. These are −  
 peek()  − Gets the element at the front of the queue without removing it. 
 isfull()  − Checks if the queue is full.  
 isempty()  − Checks if the queue is empty.  
In queue, we always dequeue (or access) data, pointed by  front  pointer and while 
enqueing (or storing) data in the queue we take help of  rear pointer.  
peek()  
This function helps to see the data at the  front  of the queue. The algorithm of 
peek() function is as follows −  
Algorithm  
begin procedure peek  
   return queue[front]  
end procedure  
isfull()  
As we are using single dimension array to implement queue, we just check for the 
rear pointer to reach at MAXSIZE to determine that the queue is full. In case we 
maintain the queue in a circular linked -list, the algorithm will differ. Algorithm of 
isfull() function – 
Algorithm  
begin procedure isfull  
 
   if rear equals to MAXSIZE  
      return true 
   else 
      return false 
   endif 
    
end procedure  
isempty()  
Algorithm of isempty() function −  
Algorithm  
begin procedure isempty  
 
   if front is less than MIN  OR front is greater than rear  
      return true 
   else 
      return false 
   endif 
    
end procedure  
If the value of  front  is less than MIN or 0, it tells that the queue is not yet initialized, 
hence empty.  
Enqueue Operation  
Queues maintain two data pointers,  front  and rear. Therefore, its operations are 
comparatively difficult to implement than that of stacks.  
The following steps should be taken to enqueue (insert) data into a queue −  
 Step 1  − Check if the queue is full.  
 Step 2  − If the queue is full, produce overflow error a nd exit.  
 Step 3  − If the queue is not full, increment  rear pointer to point the next 
empty space.  
 Step 4  − Add data element to the queue location, where the rear is pointing.  
 Step 5  − return success.  Sometimes, we also check to see if a queue is initialized or not, to 
handle any unforeseen situations.  
 
 
 
Algorithm for enqueue operation  
procedure enqueue (data)       
      if queue is full 
      return overflow  
   endif 
      rear ← rear + 1 
   queue[rear] ← data 
   return true 
   end procedure  
Dequeue Operation  
Accessing data from the queue is a process of two tasks − access the data 
where  front  is pointing and remove the data after access. The following steps are 
taken to perform  dequeue  operation −  
 Step 1  − Check if the queue is empty.  
 Step 2  − If the queue is empty, produce underflow error and exit.  
 Step 3  − If the queue is not empty, access the data where  front  is pointing.  
 Step 4  − Increment  front  pointer to point to the next available data element.  
 Step 5  − Return success.  
 
Algorithm for dequeue operation  
procedure dequeue  
    
   if queue is empty 
      return underflow  
   end if 
 
   data = queue[front] 
   front ← front + 1 
   return true 
 
end procedure  
 
 
 
Evaluation of Expression  
The way to write arithmetic expression is known as a  notation . An arithmetic 
expression can be written in three different but equivalent notations, i.e., without 
changing the essence or output of an expression. These n otations are – 
 Infix Notation  
 Prefix (Polish) Notation  
 Postfix (Reverse -Polish) Notation  
These notations are named as how they use operator in expression. We shall learn 
the same here in this chapter.  
Infix Notation  
We write expression in  infix notation, e.g. a - b + c, where operators are used  in-
between operands. It is easy for us humans to read, write, and speak in infix 
notation but the same does not go well with computing devices. An algorithm to 
process infix notation could be difficult and  costly in terms of time and space 
consumption.  
Prefix Notation  
In this notation, operator is  prefix ed to operands, i.e. operator is written ahead of 
operands. For example,  +ab. This is equivalent to its infix notation  a + b . Prefix 
notation is also known as Polish Notation . 
Postfix Notation  
This notation style is known as  Reversed Polish Notation . In this notation style, 
the operator is  postfix ed to the operands i.e., the operator is written after the 
operands. For example,  ab+. This is equivalent to its infix notation  a + b . 
The following table briefly tries to show the difference in all three notations −  
Sr.No.  Infix Notation  Prefix Notation  Postfix Notation  
1 a + b + a b a b + 
2 (a + b) ∗ c ∗ + a b c  a b + c ∗ 
3 a ∗ (b + c)  ∗ a + b c  a b c + ∗ 
4 a / b + c / d  + / a b / c d  a b / c d / +  
5 (a + b) ∗ (c + d)  ∗ + a b + c d  a b + c d + ∗ 
6 ((a + b) ∗ c) - d - ∗ + a b c d  a b + c ∗ d - 
Parsing Expressions  
As we have discussed, it is not a very efficient way to design an algorithm or 
program to parse infix notations. Instead, these infix notations are first converted 
into either postfix or prefix notations and then computed.  
To parse any arithmetic expression, we need to take care of operator precedence 
and associativity also.  
Precedence  
When an operand is in between two different operators, which operator will take the 
operand first, is decided by the precedence of an operato r over others. For example 
−   a+b*c   -  a+(b*c)  
As multiplication operation has precedence over addition, b * c will be evaluated 
first. A table of operator precedence is provided later.  
Associativity  
Associativity describes the rule where operators with the same precedence appear 
in an expression. For example, in expression a + b − c, both + and – have the same 
precedence, then which part of the expression will be evaluated first, is determ ined 
by associativity of those operators. Here, both + and − are left associative, so the 
expression will be evaluated as  (a + b) − c . 
Precedence and associativity determines the order of evaluation of an expression. 
Following is an operator precedence and  associativity table (highest to lowest) −  
Sr.No.  Operator  Precedence  Associativity  
1 Exponentiation ^  Highest  Right Associative  
2 Multiplication ( ∗ ) & Division ( / )  Second Highest  Left Associative  
3 Addition ( + ) & Subtraction ( − )  Lowest  Left Associative  
The above table shows the default behavior of operators. At any point of time in 
expression evaluation, the order can be altered by using parenthesis. For example 
− 
In a + b*c , the expression part  b*c will be evaluated first, with multiplication as 
precedence over addition. We here use parenthesis for  a + b  to be evaluated first, 
like (a + b)*c . 
Postfix Evaluation Algorithm  
Step 1 − scan the expression from left to right  
Step 2 − if it is an operand push it  to stack  
Step 3 − if it is an operator pull operand from stack and perform 
operation  
Step 4 − store the output of step 3, back to stack  
Step 5 − scan the expression until all operands are consumed  
Step 6 − pop the stack and perform operation  
A postfix expression is a collection of operators and operands in which the operator is placed 
after the operands. That means, in a postfix expression the operator follows the operands.  
 
 
 
Postfix Expression has following general structure...  Operand1 Oper and2 Operator  
Example  
 
Postfix Expression Evaluation using Stack Data 
Structure  
A postfix expression can be evaluated using the Stack data structure. To evaluate a postfix 
expression using Stack data structure we can use the following steps... Read all the symbols 
one by one from left to right in the given Postfix Expression  
1. If the reading symbol is  operand , then push it on to the Stack.  
2. If the reading symbol is  operator (+ , - , * , / etc.,) , then perform TWO pop 
operations and store the two popped oparands in two different variables (operand1 
and operand2). Then perform reading symbol operation using operand1 and 
operand2 and push result back on to the Stack.  
3. Finally! perform a pop operation and display the popped value as final result.  
Examp le Consider the following Expression..  
 
 
Multiple Stacks and Queues:  
Multiple Stacks:  
Following pictures are two ways to do two stacks in array:  
1. None fixed size of the stacks:  
 
 Stack 1 expands from the 0th element to the right  
 Stack 2 expands from the 12th element to the left  
 As long as the value of Top1 and Top2 are not next to each other, it has free elements for 
input the data in the array  
 When both Stacks are full, Top1 and Top 2 will be next to each other  
 There is no fixed boundary between Stack 1 and Stack 2  
 Elements –1 and –2 are using to store the information needed to manipulate the stack 
(subscript for Top 1 and Top 2)  
  
2. Fixed size of  the stacks:  
 
 Stack 1 expands from the 0th element to the right  
 Stack 2 expands from the 6th element to the left  
 As long as the value of Top 1 is less than 6 and greater than 0, Stack 1 has free 
elements to input the data in the array  
 As long as the value of Top 2 is less than 11 and greater than 5, Stack 2 has free 
elements to input the data in the array  
 When the value of Top 1 is 5, Stack 1 is full  
 When the value of Top 2 is 10,  stack 2 is full  
 Elements –1 and –2 are using to store the size of Stack 1 and the subscript of the array for 
Top 1 needed to manipulate Stack 1  
 Elements –3 and –4 are using to store the size of Stack 2 and the subscript of the array for 
Top 2 needed to ma nipulate Stack 2  
 procedure ADD (i,X ) //add element X to the i'th stack, 1 i n//  
 if T(i) = B(i + 1) then call STACK -FULL (i)  
T(i) ← T(i) + 1  
 V(T(i)) ← X //add X to the i'th stack//  
 end ADD  
 
procedure DELETE(i,X ) //delete topmost element of stack i//  
 if T(i) = B(i) then call STACK -EMPTY(i)  
X ← V(T(i))  
 T(i) ← T(i) - 1  
end DELETE  
 
Multiple Queues:  
Following pictures are two ways to do two queues in array:  
1. None fixed size of the queues:  
 
 Queue 1 expands from the 0th element to the right and circular back to the 0th element  
 Queue 2 expands from the 8th element to the left and circular back to the 8th element  
 Temporary boundary between the Queue 1 and the  Queue 2; as long as there has free 
elements in the array and boundary would be shift  
 Free elements could be anywhere in the Queue such as before the front, after the rear, and 
between front and rear in the Queue  
 Queue 1’s and Queue 2 ‘s size could be cha nge if it is necessary.  When the Queue 1 is full 
and the Queue 2 has free space; the Queue 1 can increase the size to use that free space 
from the Queue 2. Same way for the Queue 2  
  Elements –1, –2, and –3 are using to store the size of the Queue 1, the f ront of the Queue 1, 
and the data count for the Queue 1 needed to manipulate the Queue 1  
 Elements –4, –5, and –6 are using to store the size of the Queue 2, the front of the Queue 2, 
and the data count for the Queue 2 needed to manipulate the Queue 2  
 Inser ts data to the Queue 1, Q1Rear = (Q1Front + Q1count) % Q1Size  
 Inserts data to the Queue 2, Q2Rear = (Q2Front + Q2count) % Q2Size + Q1Size  
 Deletes data from the Queue 1, Q1Front = (Q1Front + 1) % Q1Size  
 Deletes data from the Queue 2, Q2Front = (Q2Front + 1 ) % Q2Size + Q1Size  
  
2. Fixed size of the queue:  
 
 Queue 1 expands from the 0th element to the 4th element and circular back to 0th element  
 Queue 2 expands from the 8th element to the 5th element and circular back to 8th element  
 The boundary is fixed between the Queue 1 and the Queue 2  
 Free elements could be anywhere in the Queue such as before the front, after the rear, and 
between front and rear in the Queue  
 Elements –1, –2, and –3 are using to store the size of the Queue 1, the front of the Queue 1, 
and the data count  for the Queue 1 needed to manipulate the Queue 1  
 Elements –4, –5, and –6 are using to store the size of the Queue 2, the front of the Queue 2, 
and the data count for the Queue 2 needed to manipulate the Queue 2  
 Inserts data to the Queue 1, Q1Rear = (Q1Fro nt + Q1count) % Q1Size  
 Inserts data to the Queue 2, Q2Rear = (Q2Front + Q2count) % Q2Size + Q1Size  
 Deletes data from the Queue 1, Q1Front = (Q1Front + 1) % Q1Size  
 Deletes data from the Queue 2, Q2Front = (Q2Front + 1) % Q2Size + Q1Size  
 
A linked list is a sequence of data structures, which are connected together via links.  
Linked List is a sequence of links which contains items. Each link contains a 
connection to another link. Linked list is the second most -used data structure after 
array. Following are the important terms to understand the concept of Linked List.  
 Link − Each link of a linked list can store a data called an element.  
 Next  − Each link of a linked list contains a link to the next  link called Next.  
 LinkedList  − A Linked List contains the connection link to the first link called 
First.  
Linked List Representation  
Linked list can be visualized as a chain of nodes, where every node points to the 
next node.  
   
As per the above illustration, following are the important points to be considered.  
 Linked List contains a link element called first.  
 Each link carries a data field(s) and a link field called next.  
 Each link is linked with its next link using its next link.  
 Last link carries a link as null to mark the end of the list.  
Types of Linked List  
Following are the various types of linked list.  
 Simple Linked List  − Item navigation is forward only.  
 Doubly Linked List  − Items can be navigated forward and backward.  
 Circular Linked List  − Last item contains link of the first element as next and 
the first element has a link to the last element as previous.  
Basic Operations  
Following are the basic operations supported by a list.  
 Insertion  − Adds an element at the beginning of the list.  
 Deletion  − Deletes an element at the beginn ing of the list.  
 Display  − Displays the complete list.  
 Search  − Searches an element using the given key.  
 Delete  − Deletes an element using the given key.  
Insertion Operation  
Adding a new node in linked list is a more than one step activity. We shall learn this 
with diagrams here. First, create a node using the same structure and find the 
location where it has to be inserted.  
  
Imagine that we are inserting a node  B (NewNode), between  A (LeftNode) 
and C (RightNode). Then point B.next to C −  
NewNode.next −> RightNode;  
It should look like this −  
  
Now, the next node at the left should point to the new node.  
LeftNode.next −> NewNode;  
 
 
What is Single Linked List?  
Simply a list  is a sequence of data, and the linked list is a sequence of data linked with each 
other.  
The formal definition of a single linked list is as follows...  
Single linked list is a sequence of elements in which every element has link to its next 
element in the sequence.  
In any single linked list, the individual element is called as "Node". Every "Node" contains two 
fields, data field, and the next field. The data field is used to store actual va lue of the node and 
next field is used to store the address of next node in the sequence.  
The graphical representation of a node in a single linked list is as follows...  
 
Example  
 
Operations on Single Linked List  
The following operations are performed on a Single Linked List  
 Insertion  
 Deletion  
 Display  
Before we implement actual operations, first we need to set up an empty list. First, perform the 
following steps before implementing actual operations.  
 Step 1 - Include all the  header files  which are used in the program.  
 Step 2 - Declare all the  user defined functions . 
 Step 3 - Define a Node  structure with two members  data and next 
 Step 4 - Define a Node pointer  'head'  and set it to  NULL . 
 Step 5 - Implement the main method by displaying operations menu and make suitable 
function calls in the main method to perform user selected operation.  
Insertion  
In a single linked list, the insertion operation can be performed in three ways. They are as 
follows...  
1. Inserting At Beginning of the list  
2. Inserting At End of the list  
3. Inserting At Specific location in the list  
Inserting At Beginning of the list  
We can use the following steps to insert a new node at beginning of the single linked list...  
 Step 1 - Create a  newNode  with given value.  
 Step 2 - Check whether list is  Empty  (head == NULL ) 
 Step 3 - If it is  Empty  then, set  newNode→next  = NULL  and head  = newNode . 
 Step 4 - If it is  Not Empty  then, set  newNode→next  = head  and head  = newNode . 
Inserting At End of the list  
We can use the following steps to insert a new node at end of t he single linked list...  
 Step 1 - Create a  newNode  with given value and  newNode → next  as NULL . 
 Step 2 - Check whether list is  Empty  (head  == NULL ). 
 Step 3 - If it is  Empty  then, set  head  = newNode . 
 Step 4 - If it is  Not Empty  then, define a node pointer  temp  and initialize with  head . 
 Step 5 - Keep moving the  temp  to its next node until it reaches to the last node in the list 
(until  temp → next  is equal to  NULL ). 
 Step 6 - Set temp → next  = newNode . 
Inserting At Specific location in the list (After a 
Node)  
We can use the following steps to insert a new node after a node in the single linked list...  
 Step 1 - Create a  newNode  with given value.  
 Step 2 - Check whether list is  Empty  (head  == NULL ) 
 Step 3 - If it is  Empty  then, set  newNode → next  = NULL  and head  = newNode . 
 Step 4 - If it is  Not Empty  then, define a node pointer  temp  and initialize with  head . 
 Step 5 - Keep moving the  temp  to its next node until it reaches to the node after which 
we want to insert the newNode (until  temp1 → data  is equal to  location , here location is 
the node value after which we want to insert the newNode).  
 Step 6 - Every time check whether  temp  is reached to last node or not. If it is reached to 
last node then display  'Given node is not found in the list!!! Insertion not 
possible!!!'  and terminate the function. Otherwise move the  temp  to next node.  
 Step 7 - Finally, Set ' newNode → next  = temp → next ' and ' temp → next  = newNode ' 
Deletion  
In a single linked list, the deletion operation can be performed in three ways. They are as 
follows...  
1. Deleting from Beginning of the list  
2. Deleting from End of the list  
3. Deleting a Specific Node  
Deleting from Beginning of the list  
We can use the following steps to delete a node from be ginning of the single linked list...  
 Step 1 - Check whether list is  Empty  (head  == NULL ) 
 Step 2 - If it is  Empty  then, display  'List is Empty!!! Deletion is not possible'  and 
terminate the function.  
 Step 3 - If it is  Not Empty  then, define a Node pointer  'temp'  and initialize with  head . 
 Step 4 - Check whether list is having only one node ( temp → next  == NULL ) 
 Step 5 - If it is  TRUE  then set  head  = NULL  and delete  temp  (Setting  Empty  list 
conditions)  
 Step 6 - If it is  FALSE  then set  head  = temp → next , and delete  temp . Deleting from End of the list  
We can use the following steps to delete a node from end of the single linked list...  
 Step 1 - Check whether list is  Empty  (head  == NULL ) 
 Step 2 - If it is  Empty  then, display  'List is Empty!!! Deletion is not possible'  and 
terminate the function.  
 Step 3 - If it is  Not Empty  then, define two Node pointers  'temp1'  and ' temp2'  and 
initialize ' temp1 ' with  head . 
 Step 4 - Check whether list has only one Node ( temp1 → next  == NULL ) 
 Step 5 - If it is  TRUE . Then, set  head  = NULL  and delete  temp1 . And terminate the 
function. (Setting  Empty  list condition)  
 Step 6 - If it is  FALSE . Then, set ' temp2 = temp1  ' and move  temp1  to its next node. 
Repeat the same until it reaches to the last node in the list. (until  temp1 → 
next == NULL ) 
 Step 7 - Finally, Set  temp2 → next  = NULL  and delete  temp1 . 
Deleting a Specific Node from the list  
We can use the following steps to delete a specific node from the single  linked list...  
 Step 1 - Check whether list is  Empty  (head  == NULL ) 
 Step 2 - If it is  Empty  then, display  'List is Empty!!! Deletion is not possible'  and 
terminate the function.  
 Step 3 - If it is  Not Empty  then, define two Node pointers  'temp1'  and ' temp2 ' and 
initialize ' temp1 ' with  head . 
 Step 4 - Keep moving the  temp1  until it reaches to the exact node to be deleted or to the 
last node. And every time set ' temp2 = temp1 ' before moving the ' temp1 ' to its next 
node.  
 Step 5 - If it is reached to the last nod e then display  'Given node not found in the list! 
Deletion not possible!!!' . And terminate the function.  
 Step 6 - If it is reached to the exact node which we want to delete, then check whether 
list is having only one node or not  
 Step 7 - If list has only o ne node and that is the node to be deleted, then 
set head  = NULL  and delete  temp1  (free(temp1) ). 
 Step 8 - If list contains multiple nodes, then check whether  temp1  is the first node in the 
list (temp1 == head ). 
 Step 9 - If temp1  is the first node then move the  head  to the next node ( head = head → 
next) and delete  temp1 . 
 Step 10 - If temp1  is not first node then check whether it is last node in the list ( temp1 → 
next == NULL ). 
 Step 11 - If temp1  is last node then set  temp2 → next  = NULL  and 
delete  temp1  (free(temp1) ). 
 Step 12 - If temp1  is not first node and not last node then set  temp2 → next  = temp1 → 
next and delete  temp1  (free(temp1) ). 
Displaying a Single Linked List  
We can use the following steps to display the elements of a single linked list...  
 Step 1 - Check whether list is  Empty  (head  == NULL ) 
 Step 2 - If it is  Empty  then, display  'List is Empty!!!'  and terminate the function.  
 Step 3 - If it is  Not Empty  then, define a Node pointer  'temp'  and i nitialize with  head . 
 Step 4 - Keep displaying  temp → data  with an arrow ( --->) until  temp  reaches to the last 
node   Step 5 - Finally display  temp → data  with arrow pointing to  NULL  (temp → data ---> 
NULL ). 
Linked stack and Queue:  
Linked stack  
Instead of using array, we can also use linked list to implement stack. Linked list 
allocates the memory dynamically. However, time complexity in both the scenario is 
same for all the operations i.e. push, pop and peek.  
In linked list implementation of sta ck, the nodes are maintained non -contiguously in 
the memory. Each node contains a pointer to its immediate successor node in the 
stack. Stack is said to be overflow if the space left in the memory heap is not enough 
to create a node.  
 
 
 
The top most node in the stack always contains null in its address field. Lets discuss 
the way in which, each operation is performed in linked list implementation of stack.  
Adding a node to the stack (Push operation)  
Adding a node to the stack is referred to as  push  operation. Pushing an element to a 
stack in linked list implementation is different from that of an array implementation. 
In order to push an element onto the stack, the following steps are involved. OOPs 
Concepts in Java  
1. Create  a node first and allocate memory to it.  
2. If the list is empty then the item is to be pushed as the start node of the list. This 
includes assigning value to the data part of the node and assign null to the address 
part of the node.  
3. If there are some nodes i n the list already, then we have to add the new element in 
the beginning of the list (to not violate the property of the stack). For this purpose, 
assign the address of the starting element to the address field of the new node and 
make the new node, the st arting node of the list.  
 
 
Deleting a node from the stack (POP operation)  
Deleting a node from the top of stack is referred to as  pop operation. 
Deleting a node from the linked list implementation of stack is different from 
that in the array implementation. In order to pop an element from the stack, 
we need to follow the following steps :  
1. Check for the underflow condition:  The underflow condition o ccurs when 
we try to pop from an already empty stack. The stack will be empty if the 
head pointer of the list points to null.  
2. Adjust the head pointer accordingly:  In stack, the elements are popped 
only from one end, therefore, the value stored in the head pointer must be 
deleted and the node must be freed. The next node of the head node now 
becomes the head node.  
Display the nodes (Traversing)  
Displaying all the nodes of a stack needs traversing all the nodes of the linked 
list organized in the form of stac k. For this purpose, we need to follow the 
following steps.  
1. Copy the head pointer into a temporary pointer.  
2. Move the temporary pointer through all the nodes of the list and print the 
value field attached to every node.  
Linked Queue  
In a linked queue, each node of the queue consists of two parts i.e. data part and the 
link part. Each element of the queue points to its immediate next element in the 
memory.  
In the linked queue, there are two pointers maintained in the memory i.e. front 
point er and rear pointer. The front pointer contains the address of the starting 
element of the queue while the rear pointer contains the address of the last element 
of the queue. 46Diference, and JVM  
Insertion and deletions are performed at rear and front end r espectively. If front and 
rear both are NULL, it indicates that the queue is empty.  
The linked representation of queue is shown in the following figure.  
 
 
 
Operation on Linked Queue  
There are two basic operations which can be implemented on the linked 
queues. The operations are Insertion and Deletion.  
The insert operation append the queue by adding an element to the end of the 
queue. The new element will be the last element of the queue.  
Firstly, allocate the memor y for the new node ptr by using the following statement.  
There can be the two scenario of inserting this new node ptr into the linked queue.  
we insert element into an empty queue. In this case, the condition  front = 
NULL  becomes true. Now, the new element will be added as the only element of the 
queue and the next pointer of front and rear pointer both, will point to NULL.  
Deletion operation removes the element that is first inserted among all the queue 
elements. Firstly, we need to check either the list is  empty or not. The condition front 
== NULL becomes true if the list is empty, in this case , we simply write underflow on 
the console and make exit. Otherwise, we will delete the element that is pointed by 
the pointer front. For this purpose, copy the node  pointed by the front pointer into 
the pointer ptr. Now, shift the front pointer, point to its next node and free the node 
pointed by the node ptr.  
 
Unit II   
Trees – Binary tree representations – Tree Traversal – Threaded Binary Trees – Binary Tree 
Representation of Trees – Graphs and Representations – Traversals, Connected 
Components and Spanning Trees – Shortest Paths and Transitive closure – Activity 
Networks – Topological Sort and Critical Paths.  
 
 Trees: Non -Linear data structure  
 A data structure is said to be linear if its elements form a sequence or a linear list. 
Previous  
linear data structures that we have studied like an array, stacks , queues and linked lists 
organize data in linear order. A data structure is said to be non linear if its elements form a 
hierarchical classification where, data items appear at various levels.  
Trees and Graphs are widely used non -linear data structures. Tree and graph structures 
represent hierarchical relationship between individual data elements. Graphs are nothing but 
trees with certain restrictions removed.  
Trees represent a special case of more general structures known as graphs. In a graph, 
there is  no restrictions on the number of links that can enter or leave a node, and cycles may be 
presen t in the graph. The figure  shows a tree and a non -tree.  
 
Tree is a popular data structure used in wide range of applications. A tree data structure 
can be def ined as follows...  
Tree is a non -linear data structure which organizes data in hierarchical structure and 
this is a recursive definition.  
A tree data structure can also be defined as follows...  
A tree is a finite set of one or more nodes such that:  
Ther e is a specially designated node called the root. The remaining nodes are partitioned 
into n>=0 disjoint sets T1, ..., Tn, where each of these sets is a tree. We call T1, ..., Tn are the 
subtrees of the root.  
 
A tree is hierarchical collection of nodes. One of the nodes, known as the root, is at the top of the 
hierarchy. Each node can have at most one link coming into it. The node where the link originates 
is called the parent node. The root node has no parent. The links leaving a node (any number of 
links are allowed) point to child nodes. Trees are recursive structures. Each child node is itself the 
root of a subtree. At the bottom of the tree are leaf nodes, which have no children.  
 
Advantages of trees  
Trees  are so useful and frequently used, because they have some very serious advantages:  
Trees reflect structural relationships in the data  
Trees are used to represent hierarchies  
Trees provide an efficient insertion and searching  
Trees are very fle xible data, allowing to move sub trees around with minimum effort  
 
Introduction Terminology   
In a Tree, Every individual element is called as Node. Node in a tree data structure, stores 
the actual data of that particular element and link to next element in hierarchical structure. 
Example  
 
1. Root  
In a tree data structure, the first node is called as Root Node. Every tree must have root node. We 
can say that root node is the origin of tree data structure. In any tree, there must be only one root 
node. W e never have multiple root nodes in a tree. In above tree, A is a Root node  
2. Edge  
In a tree data structure, the connecting link between any two nodes is called as EDGE. In a tree 
with 'N' number of nodes there will be a maximum of 'N -1' number of edges .  
3. Parent  
In a tree data structure, the node which is predecessor of any node is called as PARENT NODE. 
In simple words, the node which has branch from it to any other node is called as parent node. 
Parent node can also be defined as "The node which ha s child / children". e.g., Parent (A,B,C,D).  
4. Child  
In a tree data structure, the node which is descendant of any node is called as CHILD Node. In 
simple words, the node which has a link from its parent node is called as child node. In a tree, any 
parent node can have any number of child nodes. In a tree, all the nodes except root are child 
nodes. e.g., Children of D are (H, I,J).  
5. Siblings  
In a tree data structure, nodes which belong to same Parent are called as SIBLINGS. In simple 
words, the nodes  with same parent are called as Sibling nodes. Ex: Siblings (B,C, D)  
6. Leaf  
In a tree data structure, the node which does not have a child (or) node with degree zero is called 
as LEAF Node. In simple words, a leaf is a node with no child.   In a tree data structure, the leaf 
nodes are also called as External Nodes. External node is also a node with no child. In a tree, leaf 
node is also called as 'Terminal' node. Ex: (K,L,F,G,M,I,J)  
7. Internal Nodes  
In a tree data structure, the node which has atlea st one child is called as INTERNAL Node. In 
simple words, an internal node is a node with atleast one child. In a tree data structure, nodes 
other than leaf nodes are called as Internal Nodes. The root node is also said to be Internal Node 
if the tree has more than one node. Internal nodes are also called as 'Non -Terminal' nodes. 
Ex:B,C,D,E,H  
8. Degree  
In a tree data structure, the total number of children of a node (or)number of subtrees  of a node is 
called as DEGREE of that Node. In simple words, the Degree of a node is total number of 
children it has. The highest degree of a node among all the nodes in a tree is called as 'Degree of 
Tree'  
 
9. Level  
In a tree data structure, the root node is said to be at Level 0 and the children of root node are at 
Level 1 and the children of the nodes which are at Level 1 will be at Level 2 and so on... In 
simple words, in a tree each step from top to bottom is called as a Level and the Level count s tarts 
with '0' and incremented by one at each level (Step). Some authors start root level with 1.  
10. Height  
In a tree data structure, the total number of edges from leaf node to a particular node in the 
longest path is called as HEIGHT of that Node. In a tree, height of the root node is said to be 
height of the tree. In a tree, height of all leaf nodes is '0'.  
11. Depth  
In a tree data structure, the total number of edges from root node to a particular node is called as 
DEPTH of that Node. In a tree, th e total number of edges from root node to a leaf node in the 
longest path is said to be Depth of the tree. In simple words, the highest depth of any leaf node in 
a tree is said to be depth of that tree. In a tree, depth of the root node is '0'.  
12. Path  
In a tree data structure, the sequence of Nodes and Edges from one node to another node is called 
as PATH between that two Nodes. Length of a Path is total number of nodes in that path. In 
below example the path A - B - E - J has length 4.  
 
13. Sub Tree  
In a tree data structure, each child from a node forms a subtree recursively. Every child node will 
form a subtree on its parent node
 
 
Tree Representations  
A tree data structure can be represented in two methods. Those methods are as follows...  
1.List R epresentation  
2. Left Child - Right Sibling Representation  
Consider the following tree...  
 
1. List Representation  
In this representation, we use two types of nodes one for representing the node with data and 
another for representing only references. We start with a node with data from root node in the 
tree. Then it is linked to an internal node through a reference node  and is linked to any other node 
directly. This process repeats for all the nodes in the tree.  
The above tree example can be represented using List representation as follows...  
 
Fig: List representation of above Tree  
 
Fig: Possible node structure for a tree of degree k  
 
2. Left Child - Right Sibling Representation  
In this representation, we use list with one type of node which consists of three fields namely 
Data field, Left child reference field and Right sibling ref erence field. Data field stores the actual 
value of a node, left reference field stores the address of the left child and right reference field 
stores the address of the right sibling node. Graphical representation of that node is as follows...  
                                      
In this representation, every node's data field stores the actual value of that node. If that node has 
left child, then left reference field stores the address of that left child node otherwise that field 
stores NULL. If that n ode has right sibling then right reference field stores the address of right 
sibling node otherwise that field stores NULL. The above tree example can be represented using 
Left Child - Right Sibling representation as follows...  
                                    
Representation as a Degree –Two Tree  
To obtain degree -two tree representation of a tree, rotate the right - sibling pointers in the left 
child -right sibling tree clockwise by 45 degrees. In a degree -two representation, the two children 
of anode are referred as left and right children.  
                      
Binary Trees   
             In a normal tree, every node can have any number of children. Binary tree is a special 
type of tree data structure in which every node can have a maximum of 2 children. One is known 
as left child and the other is known as right child.  
~A tree in which every node can have a maximum of two children is called as Binary Tree.  
~In a binary tree, every node can have either 0 children or 1 child or 2 children but not more than 
2 children. Example  
 
 
There are different  types of binary trees and they are...  
1. Strictly Binary Tree  
In a binary tree, every node can have a maximum of two children. But in strictly binary tree, 
every node should have exactly two children or none. That means every internal node must have 
exactly two children. A strictly Binary Tree can be defined as follows...  
A binary tree in which every node has either two or zero number of children is called Strictly 
Binary Tree. Strictly binary tree is also called as Full Binary Tree or Proper Binary Tree or 2 -
Tree  
2. Complete Binary Tree  
In a binary tree, every node can h ave a maximum of two children. But in strictly binary tree, 
every node should have exactly two children or none and in complete binary tree all the nodes 
must have exactly two children and at every level of complete binary tree there must be 2 level 
number  of nodes. For example at level 2 there must be 2^2 = 4 nodes and at level 3 there must be 
2^3 = 8 nodes.  
A binary tree in which every internal node has exactly two children and all leaf nodes are at same 
level is called Complete Binary Tree.  
Complete bi nary tree is also called as Perfect Binary Tree  
        
 
3. Extended Binary Tree  
A binary tree can be converted into Full Binary tree by adding dummy nodes to existing nodes 
wherever required.  
The full binary tree obtained by adding dummy nodes to a bi nary tree is called as Extended 
Binary Tree.  
 
Abstract Data Type  
Definition: A binary tree is a finite set of nodes that is either empty or consists of a root and two 
disjoint binary trees called left subtree and right subtree.  
ADT contains specification for the binary tree ADT.  
Structure Binary_Tree (abbreviated BinTree ) is  
objects: a finite set of nodes either empty or consisting of a root node, left Binary_Tree , and right 
Binary_Tree .  
Functions:  
for all bt, bt1, bt2 
 BinTr ee, item 
 element  
Bintree Create()::= creates an empty binary tree  
Boolean IsEmpty( bt)::= if ( bt==empty binary tree) return TRUE else return FALSE  
BinTree MakeBT( bt1, item, bt2)::= return a binary tree whose left subtree is bt1, whose right 
subtree is bt2, and whose root node contains the data item  
Bintree Lchild( bt)::= if (IsEmpty( bt)) return error else return the left subtree of bt  
element Data( bt)::= if (IsEmpty( bt)) return error else return the data in the root node of bt  
Bintree Rchild( bt)::= if  (IsEmpty( bt)) return error else return the right subtree of bt 
                       
 
Differences between A Tree and A Binary Tree  
• The subtrees of a binary tree are ordered; those of a tree are not ordered.  
                                               
Above two trees are different when viewed as binary trees. But same when viewed as trees.  
Properties of Binary Trees  
1.Maximum Number of Nodes in BT  
 maximum number of nodes on level i of a binary tree is 2 i-1, i>=1.  
k-1, k>=1.  
 
Proof By Induction:  
Induction Base: The root is the only node on level i=1.Hence ,the maximum number of nodes o n 
level i=1 is 2 i-1=20=1.  
Induction Hypothesis: Let I be an arbitrary positive integer greater than 1.Assume that maximum 
number of nodes on level i -1 is 2 i-2.  
Induction Step: The maximum number of nodes on level i -1 is 2 i-2 by the induction hypothesis. 
Since each node in a binary tree has a maximum degree of 2,the maximum number of nodes on 
level i is two times the maximum number of nodes on level i -1,or 2 i-1.  
The maximum number of nodes in a binary tree of depth k is  
2.Relation between number of leaf nodes and degree -2 nodes : For any nonempty binary tree, 
T, if n 0 is the number of leaf nodes and n 2 the number of nodes of degree 2, then n 0=n2+1.  
PROOF: Let n and B denote the total number of nodes and branches in T. Let n0, n1, n2 represent 
the nodes wi th zero children, single child, and two children respectively.  
B+1=n  B=n1+2n2 ==> n1+2n2+1= n,  
n1+2n2+1= n0+n1+n2 ==> n0=n2+1  
3. A full binary tree of depth k is a binary tree of depth k having 2 -1 nodes, k>=0.  
A binary tree with n nodes and depth k is complete iff its nodes correspond to the nodes numbered 
from 1 to n in the full binary tree of depth k.  
 
Binary Tree Representation  
A binary tree data structure is represented using two methods. Those methods are  
1)Array Representation  
2)Linked  List Representation  
1)Array Representation:  In array representation of binary tree, we use a one dimensional array 
(1-D Array) to represent a binary tree. To represent a binary tree of depth 'n' using array 
representation, we need one dimensional array with a maximum size of  
A complete binary tree  with n nodes (depth = log n + 1) is represented sequentially, then for any 
node with index i, 1<= i<=n, we have: a) parent (i) is at i/2 if i!=1. If i=1, i is at the root and has no 
parent. b) left_child (i) ia at 2 i if 2i<=n. If 2 i>n, then i has no left child. c) right_child (i) is at 2 i+1 
if 2i +1 <= n. If 2 i +1 >n, then i has no right child  
 
2. Linked Representation : We use linked list to represent a binary tree. In a linked list, every 
node consists of three fields. First field, for storing  left child address, second for storing actual 
data and third for storing right child address. In this linked list representation, a node has the 
following structure...  
 
typedef struct node *tree_pointer;  
typedef struct node  
{  
int data;  
tree_pointer left_child, right_child;  
};. 
 
Binary Tree Traversals  
When we wanted to display a binary tree, we need to follow some order in which all the nodes of 
that binary tree must be displayed. In any binary tree displaying order of nodes depends on the 
traversal method. Displaying (or) visiting order of nodes in a b inary tree is called as Binary Tree 
Traversal.  
There are three types of binary tree traversals.  
1)In - Order Traversal   2)Pre - Order Traversal  3)Post - Order Traversal  
Binary Tree Traversals  
  • 1. In - Order Traversal ( leftChild - root - rightChild )  
 I - D - J - B - F - A - G - K - C – H  
• 2. Pre - Order Traversal ( r oot - leftChild - rightChild )  
 A - B - D - I - J - F - C - G - K – H  
• 3. Post - Order Traversal ( l eftChild - rightChild - root )  
 I - J - D - F - B - K - G - H - C – A 
 
1. In - Order Traversal ( leftChild - root - rightChild )  
In In -Order traversal, the root node is visited between left child and right child. In this traversal, 
the left child node is visited first, then the root node is visited and later we go for visiti ng right 
child node. This in -order traversal is applicable for every root node of all subtrees in the tree. This 
is performed recursively for all nodes in the tree. In the above example of binary tree, first we try 
to visit left child of root node 'A', but  A's left child is a root node for left subtree. so we try to visit 
its (B's) left child 'D' and again D is a root for subtree with nodes D, I and J. So we try to visit its 
left child 'I' and it is the left most child. So first we  visit 'I'then go  for its root node 'D' and later 
we visit D's right child 'J'. With this we have completed the left part of node B. Then visit 'B' and 
next B's right child 'F' is visited. With this we have completed left part of node A. Then visit root 
node 'A'. With this  we have completed left and root parts of node A. Then we go for right part of 
the node A. In right of A again there is a subtree with root C. So go for left child of C and again it 
is a subtree with root G. But G does not have left part so we visit 'G' an d then visit G's right child 
K. With this we have completed the left part of node C. Then visit root node'C' and next visit C's 
right child 'H' which is the right most child in the tree so we stop the process. That means here we 
have visited in the order o f I - D - J - B - F - A - G - K - C - H using In -Order Traversal.  
In-Order Traversal for above example of binary tree is  
I - D - J - B - F - A - G - K - C – H  
 
Algorithm  
Until all nodes are traversed −  
Step 1 − Recursively traverse left subtree.  
Step 2 − Visit root node.  
Step 3 − Recursively traverse right subtree.  
void inorder(tree_pointer ptr) /* inorder tree traversal */ Recursive  
{  
if (ptr) {  
inorder(ptr ->left_child);  
printf(―%d‖, ptr ->data);  
indorder(ptr ->right_child);  
}  
}  
 
2. Pre - Order Traversal ( root - leftChild - rightChild )  
In Pre -Order traversal, the root node is visited before left child and right child nodes. In this 
traversal, the root node is visited first, then its left child and later its right child. This pre -order 
traversal is applicable for every root node of all subtrees in the tree. In the above example of 
binary tree, first we visit root node 'A' then visit its left child 'B' which is a root for D and F. So 
we visit B's left child 'D' and again D is a roo t for I and J. So we visit D's left child'I' which is the 
left most child. So next we go for visiting D's right child 'J'. With this we have completed root, 
left and right parts of node D and root, left parts of node B. Next visit B's right child'F'. With this 
we have completed root and left parts of node A. So we go for A's right child 'C' which is a root 
node for G and H. After visiting C, we go for its left child 'G' which is a root  for node K. So next 
we visit left of G, but it does not have left child so we go for G's right child 'K'. With this we have 
completed node C's root and left parts. Next visit C's right child 'H' which is the right most child 
in the tree. So we stop the pro cess. That means here we have visited in the order of A -B-D-I-J-F-
C-G-K-H using Pre -Order Traversal.  
 
Algorithm  
Until all nodes are traversed −  
Step 1 − Visit root node.  
Step 2 − Recursively traverse left subtree.  
Step 3 − Recursively traverse right s ubtree.  
void preorder(tree_pointer ptr) /* preorder tree traversal */ Recursive  
{  
if (ptr) {  
printf(―%d‖, ptr ->data);  
preorder(ptr ->left_child);  
preorder(ptr ->right_child);  
}  
}  
 
 
 
3. Post - Order Traversal ( leftChild - rightChild - root )  
In Pos t-Order traversal, the root node is visited after left child and right child. In this traversal, 
left child node is visited first, then its right child and then its root node. This is recursively 
performed until the right most node is visited. Here we have  visited in the order of I - J - D - F - B 
- K - G - H - C - A using Post -Order Traversal.  
 
Algorithm  
Until all nodes are traversed −  
Step 1 − Recursively traverse left subtree.  
Step 2 − Recursively traverse right subtree.  
Step 3 − Visit root node.  
void postorder(tree_pointer ptr) /* postorder tree traversal */ Recursive  
{  
if (ptr) {  
postorder(ptr ->left_child);  
postorder(ptr ->right_child);  
printf(―%d‖, ptr ->data);  
}  
}  
Binary Search Trees  
Binary Search Tree Representation  
Binary Search tree exhibits a special behavior. A node's left child must have value less than its 
parent's value and node's right child must have value greater than it's parent value.  
                                             
 
We're going to implement tree using node object and connecting them through references.  
 
Definition:  A binary search tree (BST) is a binary tree. It may be empty. If it is not empty,then 
all nodes follows the below mentioned properties −  
 
keys in a nonempty left subtree (right subtree) are smaller (larger) than the key in the root 
of subtree.  
 
 
 
left sub -tree and right sub -tree and can be defined as −  
left_subtree (keys) ≤ node (key) ≤ right_subtree (keys)  
 
Fig: Example Binary Search Trees  
 
 
Graph  
A graph G = (V,E) is composed of:  
V: set of vertices  
E: set of edges connecting the vertices in V  
• An edge e = (u,v) is a pair of vertices  
Example:  
  
V= {a,b,c,d,e}  
E={(a,b),(a,c),(a,d),(b,e),(c,d),(c,e),(d,e)}  
 
Graph Terminology  
Undirected Graph:  
An undirected graph is one in which the pair of vertices in a edge is unordered, 
(v0, v1) = (v1 ,v0)  
Directed Graph:  
A directed graph is one in which each edge is a directed pair of vertices, <v0, 
v1> != <v1,v0>  
                            
 
Complete Graph:  
A complete graph is a graph that has the maximum number of edges for undirected graph with  
n vertices, the maximum number of edges is n(n -1)/2 for directed graph with n vertices, the 
maximum number of edges is n(n -1) 
                                                                         
Adjacent and Incident:  
If (v0, v1) is an edge in an undirected graph,  
– v0 and v1 are adjacent  
– The edge (v0, v1) is incident on vertices v0 and v1  
 
If <v0, v1> is an edge in a directed graph  
– v0 is adjacent to v1, and v1 is adjacent from v0  
– The edge <v0, v1> is inciden t on v0 and v1  
 
Multigraph:  
In a multigraph, there can be more than one edge from vertex P to 
vertex Q. In a simple graph there is at most one.  
                                       
Graph with self edge or graph with feedback loops:  
A self loop is an  edge that connects a vertex to itself. In some graph it makes sense to allow self -
loops; in some it doesn't.  
                                                                     
Subgraph:  
A subgraph of G is a graph G‟ such that V(G‟) is a subset of V(G)  and E(G‟) is a 
subset of E(G)  
  
Path:  
A path from vertex vp to vertex vq in a graph G, is a sequence of vertices, vp, 
vi1, vi2, ..., vin, vq, such that (vp, vi1), (vi1, vi2), ..., (vin, vq) are edges in an 
undirected graph  
The length of a path is the n umber of edges on it.  
Simple Path and Style:  
A simple path is a path in which all vertices, except possibly the first and the 
last, are distinct.  
A cycle is a simple path in which the first and the last vertices are the same  
In an undirected graph G, t wo vertices, v0 and v1, are connected if there is a 
path in G from v0 to v1.  
An undirected graph is connected if, for every pair of distinct vertices vi, vj, 
there is a path from vi to vj  
                           
Degree  
The degree of a vertex is the number of edges incident to that vertex  
For directed graph,  
– the in-degree of a vertex v is the number of edges that have v as the head  
– the out-degree of a vertex v is the number of edges that have v as the tail  
– if di is the degree of a vertex i in a graph G with n vertices and e edges, the 
number of edges is  
                
Example:  
 
ADT for Graph  
Graph ADT is  
Data structures: a nonempty set of vertices and a set of undirected  
edges, where each edge is a pai r of vertices  
Functions: for all graph 
 Graph , v, v1 and v2 
Vertices  
 Graph Create()::=return an empty graph  
 Graph InsertVertex( graph , v)::= return a graph with v inserted. V  
has no incident edge.  
 Graph InsertEdge( graph , v1,v2)::= return a graph with new edge between 
v1 and v2  
 Graph DeleteVertex( graph , v)::= return a graph in which v and all edges 
incident to it are removed  
 Graph DeleteEdge( graph , v1, v2)::=return a graph in which the edge  
(v1, v2) is removed  
 Boolean IsEmpty( graph )::= if ( graph ==empty graph ) return TRUE  
else return FALSE  
 List Adjacent( graph ,v)::= return a list of all vertices that are adjacent  
to v  
Graph Representations  
Graph can be represented in the following ways:  
a) Adjacency Matrix  
b) Adjac ency Lists  
c) Adjacency Multilists  
a) Adjacency Matrix  
Let G=(V,E) be a graph with n vertices.  
The adjacency matrix of G is a two -dimensional by array, say adj_mat.  
If the edge (vi, vj) is in E(G), adj_mat[i][j]=1  
If there is no such edge in E(G), ad j_mat[i][j]=0  
The adjacency matrix for an undirected graph is symmetric; the adjacency matrix for a digraph 
need not be symmetric  
Examples for Adjacency Matrix:  
   
  
Merits of Adjacency Matrix  
From the adjacency matrix, to determine the connection of vertices is easy  
The degree of a vertex is  
For a digraph, the row sum is the out_degree, while the column sum is the 
in_degree  
                   
b) Adjacency Lists  
Each row in adjacency matrix  is represented as an adjacency list.  
   
  
 
 
Interesting Operations  
 degree of a vertex in an undirected graph  
# of nodes in adjacency list  
 # of edges in a graph  
determined in O(n+e)  
 out-degree of a vertex in a directed graph  
# of nodes in its adjacency list  
 in-degree of a vertex in a directed graph  
traverse the whole data structure  
Orthogonal representation for graph G3  
               
 
                                   
 
c) Adjacency Multilists  
An edge in an undirected graph is represented by two nodes in adjacency list 
representation.  
Adjacency Multilists  
– lists in which nodes may be shared among several lists. (an edge is shared by 
two different paths)  
 
Example for Adjacency Multlists  
Lists: vertex 0: M1 ->M2->M3, vertex 1: M1 ->M4->M5  
vertex 2: M2 ->M4->M6, vertex 3: M3 ->M5->M6  
       
 
Some Graph Operations  
The following are some graph operations:  
a) Traversal Given G=(V,E) and vertex v, find all w
 V, such that w connects v.  
– Depth First Search (DFS) preorder tree traversal  
– Breadth First Search (BFS) level order tree traversal  
b) Spanning Trees  
c) Connected Components  
Graph G and its adjacency lists  
  
depth first search: v0, v1, v3, v7, v4, v5, v2, v6  
breadth first sear ch: v0, v1, v2, v3, v4, v5, v6, v7  
 
Depth First Search  
Depth First Search (DFS) algorithm traverses a graph in a depthward motion 
and uses a stack to remember to get the next vertex to start a search, when a 
dead end occurs in any iteration.  
                                                       
As in the example given above, DFS algorithm traverses from A to B to C to D first then to E, then 
to F and lastly to G. It employs the following rules.  
 Rule 1 − Visit the adjacent unvisited vertex. Mark it as visited. Display it. Push 
it in a stack.  
 Rule 2 − If no adjacent vertex is found, pop up a vertex from the stack. (It will 
pop up all the vertices from the stack, which do not have adjacent vertices.)  
 Rule 3 − Repeat Rule 1 and Rule 2 until the stack is empty.  
Step 
 Traversal  
 Description  
 
1 
 Initialize the 
stack.  
 
 
2 
 Mark S as visited and put it onto 
the stack. Explore any unvisited 
adjacent node from S. We have 
three nodes and we can pick any 
of them. For this example, we 
shall take the node in an 
alphabetical order.  
 
3 
 Mark A as visited and put it onto 
the stack. Explore any unvisited 
adjacent node from A. Both S and 
D are adjacent to A but we are 
concerned for unvisited nodes 
only. 
 
4 
 Visit D and mark it as visited 
and put onto the stack. Here, 
we have B and C nodes, which 
are adjacent to D and both are 
unvisited. However, we shall 
again choose in an alphabetical 
order.  
 
 
5 
 We choose B, mark it as visited 
and put onto the stack. Here B 
does not have any unvisited 
adjacent node. So, we pop B from 
the stack.  
 
6 
 We check the stack top for return 
to the previous node and check if 
it has any unvisited nodes. Here, 
we find D to be on the top of the 
stack.  
 
7 
 Only unvisited adjacent node is 
from D is C now. So we visit C, 
mark it as visited and put it onto 
the stack.  
 
 
As C does not have any unvisited adjacent node so we keep popping the stack 
until we find a node that has an unvisited adjacent node. In this case, there's 
none and we keep popping until the stack is empty.  
 
Breadth First Search  
Breadth First Search (BFS) alg orithm traverses a graph in a breadthward motion and uses a 
queue to remember to get the next vertex to start a search, when a dead end occurs in any 
iteration.  
                                                  
As in the example given above, BFS algorithm  traverses from A to B to E to F 
first then to C and G lastly to D. It employs the following rules.  
Rule 1 − Visit the adjacent unvisited vertex. Mark it as visited. Display it. Insert it in 
a queue.  
Rule 2 − If no adjacent vertex is found, remove the first vertex from the queue.  
Rule 3 − Repeat Rule 1 and Rule 2 until the queue is empty.  
Step  
 Traversal  
 Description  
 
1 
 Initialize the queue.  
 
2 
 We start from visiting S 
(starting node), and mark it 
as visited.  
 
3 
 We then see an unvisited 
adjacent node from S. In 
this example, we have three 
nodes but alphabetically we 
choose A, mark it as visited 
and enqueue it.  
 
4 
 Next, the unvisited adjacent 
node from S is B. We mark 
it as visited and enqueue it.  
 
5 
 Next, the unvisited adjacent 
node from S is C. We mark 
it as visited and enqueue it.  
 
6 
 Now, S is left with no 
unvisited adjacent nodes. 
So, we dequeue and find A.  
 
7 
 From A we have D as 
unvisited adjacent node. We 
mark it as visited and 
enqueue it.  
 
 
At this stage, we are left with no unmarked (unvisited) nodes. But as per the 
algorithm we keep on dequeuing in order to get all unvisited nodes. When the 
queue gets emptied, the program  is over.  
 
Spanning Trees  
When graph G is connected, a depth first or breadth first search starting at any 
vertex will visit all vertices in G  
A spanning tree is any tree that consists solely of edges in G and that includes 
all the vertices  
E(G): T (tree edges) + N (nontree edges) where T: set of edges used during search 
N: set of remaining edges  
Examples of Spanning Tree  
 
Either dfs or bfs can be used to create a spanning tree  
– When dfs  is used, the resulting spanning tree is known as a depth first 
spanning tree  
– When bfs is used, the resulting spanning tree is known as a breadth first 
spanning tree  
 
While adding a nontree edge into any spanning tree, this will create a cycle  
DFS VS BFS Spanning Tree  
 
 
A spanning tree is a minimal subgraph, G‟, of G such that V(G‟)=V(G) and G‟ is 
connected.  
Any connected graph with n vertices must have at least n -1 edges.  
A biconnected graph is a connected graph that hasno articulation points.  
 
    
 
biconnected component: a maximal connected subgraph H (no subgraph that is both 
biconnected and properly contains H).  
           
 
Minimum Cost Spanning Tree  
 cost of a spanning tree of a weighted undirected graph is the sum of the 
costs of the edges in the spanning tree  
 
 
– Kruskal  
– Prim  
– Sollin  
 
Kruskal’s Algorithm  
Build a minimum cost spanning tree T by adding edges to T one at a time  
Select the edges for inclusion in T in nondecreasing order of the cost  
An edge is added to T if it does not form a cycle  
Since G is connected and has n > 0 vert ices, exactly n -1 edges will be selected  
Kruskal’s algorithm  
1. Sort all the edges in non -decreasing order of their weight.  
2. Pick the smallest edge. Check if it forms a cycle with the spanning 
tree formed so far. If cycle is not formed, include this e dge. Else, 
discard it.  
3. Repeat step#2 until there are (V -1) edges in the spanning tree.  
 
Psuedocode for Kruskal’s Algorithm  
Kruskal(G, V, E)  
{  
T= {};  
while(T contains less than n -1 edges && E is not empty)  
{  
choose a least cost edge (v,w) from E;   
delete (v,w) from E;  
if ((v,w) does not create a cycle in T)  
add (v,w) to T  
else  
discard (v,w);  
}  
if (T contains fewer than n -1 edges)  
printf(“No spanning tree \n”);  
} 
Examples for Kruskal’s Algorithm  
                                  
 
 
Prim’s Algorithm  
Prim's algorithm to find minimum cost spanning tree (as Kruskal's algorithm) 
uses the greedy approach. Prim's algorithm shares a similarity with the 
shortest path first algorithms.  
Prim's algorithm, in contrast with Kruskal's algorithm, treats the nodes as a 
single tree and keeps on adding new nodes to the spanning tree from the given 
graph.  
To contrast with Kruskal's algorithm and to understand Prim's algorithm better, 
we shall use the same example −  
Steps of Prim's Algorithm: The foll owing are the main 3 steps of the Prim's 
Algorithm:  
1. Begin with any vertex which you think would be suitable and add it to the 
tree.  
2. Find an edge that connects any vertex in the tree to any vertex that is not in 
the tree. Note that, we don't have to  form cycles.  
3. Stop when n - 1 edges have been added to the tree.  
 
Psuedocode of Prim’s algorithm  
Prims(G,V,E)  
{  
T={};  
TV={0};  
while (T contains fewer than n -1 edges)  
{  
let (u,v) be a least cost edge such that and if (there is no such edge ) bre ak;  
add v to TV;  
add (u,v) to T;  
}  
if (T contains fewer than n -1 edges)  
printf(“No spanning tree \n”);  
} 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
#define MAX_VERTICES 6  
int cost[][MAX_VERTICES]=  
{{ 0, 50, 10, 1000, 45, 1000},  
{1000, 0, 15, 1000, 10, 1000},  
{ 20, 1000, 0, 15, 1000, 1000},  
{1000, 20, 1000, 0, 35, 1000},  
{1000, 1000, 30, 1000, 0, 1000},  
{1000, 1000, 1000, 3, 1000, 0}};  
int distance[MAX_VERTICES];  
short int found{MAX_VERTICES];  
int n = MAX_VERTICES ; 
void shortestpath(int v, int cost[][MAX_ERXT ICES], int distance[], int n, 
short int found[])  
{  
int i, u, w;  
for (i=0; i<n; i++)  
{  
found[i] = FALSE;  
distance[i] = cost[v][i];  
}  
found[v] = TRUE;  
distance[v] = 0;  
for (i=0; i<n -2; i++)  
{  
determine n -1 paths from v  
u = choose( distance, n, found);  
found[u] = TRUE;  
for (w=0; w<n; w++)  
if (!found[w])  
if (distance[u]+cost[u][w]<distance[w])  
distance[w] = distance[u]+cost[u][w];  
}  
}  
 
 
All Pairs Shortest Paths  
All pairs shortest path algorithm finds the shortest paths betwee n all pairs of 
vertices.  
 
Solution 1  
3)  
 
Solution 2  
 
iently large 
number  
vertices with an index <= k  
index greater than n -1  
t[i][j]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Graph with negative cycle   
Algorithm for All Pairs Shortest Paths  
void allcosts(int cost[][MAX_VERTICES], int distance[][MAX_VERTICES], int n)  
{  
int i, j, k;  
for (i=0; i<n; i++)  
for (j=0; j<n; j++) distance[i][j] = cost[i][j];  
for (k=0; k<n; k++)  
for (i=0; i<n; i++)  
for (j=0; j<n; j++)  
if (distance[i][k]+distance[k][j] < distance[i][j])  
distance[i][j]= distance[i][k]+distance[k][j ];  
}  
Example  
Directed graph and its cost matrix  
 
 
Transitive Closure  
           Goal: given a graph with unweighted edges, determine if there is a path 
from i to j for all i and j.  
(1) Require positive path (> 0) lengths. transitive closure matrix  
reflexive transitive closure matrix  
 
 
 
 
Unit III  
Algorithms – Priority Queues - Heaps – Heap Sort – Merge Sort – Quick Sort – 
Binary Search – Finding the Maximum and Minimum.  
 
Algorithm  
 An algorithm is a step -by-step procedure to solve a problem in a finite 
number of steps.  
 Branching and repetition are included in the steps of an algorithm.  
 This branching and repetition depend on the problem for which Algorithm is 
developed.  
 All the steps of Algorithm during the definition should be written in a 
human -understandable language which does not  depend on any 
programming language.  
 we can choose any programming language to implement the Algorithm.  
 Pseudocode and flow chart are popular ways to represent an algorithm.  
 
An algorithm must satisfy the following criteria:  
1. Input:  An algorithm should have zero or more but should be a finite number of 
inputs. We can also say that it is essential for any algorithm before starting. Input 
should be given to it initially before the Algorithm begins.  
2. Output:  An algorithm must give at least one required result from the given set 
of input values. These output values are known as the solution to a problem.  
3. Definiteness:  Each step must be clear, unambiguous, and precisely defined.  
4. Finiteness: Finiteness means Algorithm should be term inated after a finite 
number of steps. Also, each step should be finished in a finite amount of time.  
5. Effectiveness:  Each step of the Algorithm must be feasible i.e., it should be 
practically possible to perform the action. Every Algorithm is generally expected to 
be effective.  
 
Divide and Conquer   
Divide and Conquer is one of the best -known general algorithm design 
technique. It works according to the following general plan:  
 Given a function to compute on „n‟ inputs the divide -and-conquer 
strategy sugg ests splitting the inputs into „k‟ distinct subsets, 1<k<=n, 
yielding „k‟ sub problems.  
 These sub problems must be solved, and then a method must be found 
to combine sub solutions into a solution of the whole.  
  If the sub problems are still relatively la rge, then the divide -and-conquer 
strategy can possibly be reapplied.  
  Often the sub problems resulting from a divide -and-conquer design are 
of the same type as the original problem. For those cases the 
reapplication of the divide -and- conquer principle is naturally expressed 
by a recursive algorithm.  
  
A typical case with k =2is diagrammatically shown below.        
  
In the above specification,  
 Initially DAndC(P) is invoked, where „P‟ is the problem to be solved.  
 Small (P) is a Boolean -valued function that determines whether the 
input size is small enough that the answer can be computed without 
splitting. If this so, the function „ S’ is invoked. Otherwise, the problem P 
is divided into smaller sub problems. These sub problems P 1, P2 …Pk are 
solved by recursive application of DAndC .  
 Combine is a function that determines th e solution to P using the 
solutions to the „k‟ sub problems.  
 
Binary Search   
 Problem definition: Let a i, 1 ≤ i ≤ n be a list of elements that are sorted in non -
decreasing order. The problem is to find whether a given element x is present in the list 
or no t. If x is present we have to determine a value j (element‘s position) such that a j=x. 
If x is not in the list, then j is set to zero.  
 Solution: Let P = (n, a i…a l , x) denote an arbitrary instance of search problem where n 
is the number of elements in the list, ai…a l is the list of elements and x is the key element 
to be searched for in the given list. Binary search on the list is done as follows:  
 Step1: Pick an index q in the middle range [i, l] i.e. q= [(n + 1)/2] and compare x with 
aq. Step 2: if x = a q i.e key element is equal to mid element, the problem is immediately 
solved.  
 Step 3: if x <a qin this case x has to be searched for only in the sub -list a i, ai+1, …… , aq- 
Therefore, problem reduces to (q-i, ai…a q-1, x).  
 Step 4: if x >a q,x has to be searched for only in the sub -list a q+1, ...,., al . Therefore problem 
reduces to (l-i, aq+1…a l, x).  
 For the above solution procedure, the Algorithm can be implemented as recursive or non - 
recursive algorithm.  
Recursive binary search algorithm  
 
Iterative binary search:  
 
 
 
Finding the maximum and minimum  
Problem statement: Given a list of n elements, the problem is to find the maximum and 
minimum items.  
StraightMaxMin: A simple and straight forward algorithm  to achieve this is given below.  
  
 
 
Explanation:  
StraightMaxMin requires 2(n -1) comparisons in the best, average & worst cases.  
By realizing the comparison of a[i]>max is false, improvement in a  algorithm can be done. 
Hence we can replace the contents of the for loop by,  
If(a[i]>Max) then Max = a[i]; Else if (a[i]<min) min=a[i]  
On the average a[i] is > max half the time. So, the avg. no. of comparison is 3n/2 -1.  
Algorithm based on Divide and  Conquer strategy  
Let P = (n, a [i],……,a [j]) denote an arbitrary instance of the problem. Here ‗n‘ is the no. of 
elements in the list (a[i],….,a[j]) and we are interested in finding the maximum and minimum of 
the list. If the list has more than 2 element s, P has to be divided into smaller instances.  
For example, we might divide ‗P‘ into the 2 instances, P1= ( [n/2],a[1], a[n/2])  
P2= (n -[n/2], a[[n/2]+1],……., a[n])  
After having divided ‗P‘ into 2 smaller sub problems, we can solve them by recursively invoking 
the same divide -and-conquer algorithm.  
 Algorithm:  
 
 
 
 
 
Compared with the straight forward method (2n -2) this method saves 25% in 
comparisons.  
 
Space Complexity  
Compared to the straight forward method, the MaxMin  method requires extra 
stack space for i, j, max, min, max1 and min1. Given n elements there will be 
[log 2n] + 1 levels of recursion and we need to save seven values for each 
recursive call. (6 + 1 for return address).  
 
 Merge Sort  
Merge sort is a perfec t example of a successful application of the divide -and 
conquer technique. It sorts a given array A [O ... n - 1] by dividing it into two 
halves A [0 .. \n/2]-1] and A [ ⎝n/2] .. n-1], sorting each of them recursively, and 
then merging the two smaller sort ed arrays into a single sorted one.  
 
The merging of two sorted arrays can be done as follows.  
 Two pointers (array indices) are initialized to point to the first elements of 
the arrays being merged.  
  The elements pointed to are compared, and the smaller of them is added 
to a new array being constructed  
 After that, the index of the smaller element is incremented to point to its 
immediate successor in the array it was copied from. This operation is 
repeated until one of the two given arrays is exhausted, and then the 
remaining elements of the other array are copied to the end of the new 
array.  
 
Example:  
The operation of the algorithm on the list 8, 3, 2, 9, 7, 1, 5, 4 is illustrated in 
the figure.  
Analysis  
Here the basic operation is key comparison. As merge sort execution does not 
depend on the order of the data, best case and average case runtime are the 
same as worst case runtime.  
Worst case: During key comparison, neither of the two arrays be comes empty 
before the  
other one contains just one element leads to the worst case of merge sort. 
Assuming for  
simplicity that total number of elements n is a power of 2, the recurrence 
relation for the  
number of key comparisons C(n) is 
  
where, Cmerge(n) is the number of key comparisons made during the merging 
stage.  
Let us analyze Cmerge(n), the number of key comparisons performed during the 
merging stage. At each step, exactly one comparison is made, after which the 
total number of elements in the tw o arrays still needing to be processed is 
reduced by 1. In the worst case, neither of the two arrays becomes empty before 
the other one contains just one element (e.g., smaller elements may come from 
the alternating arrays).Therefore, for the worst case, Cmerge(n) = n –1.  
Now, 
 
Solving the recurrence equation using master theorem:  
Here a = 2, b = 2, f (n) = n, d = 1. Therefore 2 = 2 1, case 2 holds in the master 
theorem  
Cworst(n) = Θ (n d log n) = Θ (n 1 log n) = Θ (n log n)Therefore Cworst(n) = Θ (n log 
n)  
Advantages:  
 Number of comparisons performed is nearly optimal.  
 For large n, the numb er of comparisons made by this algorithm in the 
average case turns out to be about 0.25n less and hence is also in Θ(n log 
n).  
 Mergesort will never degrade to O (n 2)  
 Another advantage of mergesort over quicksort and heapsort is its 
stability . (A sorting algorithm is said to be stable if two objects with 
equal keys appear in the same order in sorted output as they appear in 
the input array to be sorted.)  
Limitations:  
 The principal shortcoming of mergesort is the linear amount [O(n) ] of extra 
storage the algorithm requires. Though merging can be done in -place, the 
resulting algorithm is quite complicated and of theoretical interest only.  
 
Variations of mer ge sort  
1. The algorithm can be implemented bottom up by merging pairs of the array‟s 
elements, then merging the sorted pairs, and so on. (If n is not a power of 2, 
only slight bookkeeping complications arise.) This avoids the time and space 
overhead of u sing a stack to handle recursive calls.  
2. We can divide a list to be sorted in more than two parts, sort each 
recursively, and then merge them together. This scheme, which is particularly 
useful for sorting files residing on secondary memory devices, is called multiway 
mergesort.  
Quick sort  
Quicksort is the other important sorting algorithm that is based on the divide -and-conquer 
approach. Unlike mergesort, which divides its input elements according to their position in the 
array, quicksort divides (or partitions) them according to their valu e.  
A partition is an arrangement of the array‘s elements so that all the elements to the left of some 
element A[s] are less than or equal to A[s], and all the elements to the right of A[s] are greater 
than or equal to it:  
 
Obviously, after a partition i s achieved, A[s] will be in its final position in the sorted array,  
and we can continue sorting the two subarrays to the left and the right of A[s] independently (e.g., 
by the same method).  
In quick sort, the entire work happens in the division stage, wi th no work required to combine the 
solutions to the sub problems.  
  
Partitioning  
We start by selecting a pivot —an element with respect to whose value we are going to divide  
the subarray. There are several different strategies for selecting a pivot. We u se  
the sophisticated method suggested by C.A.R. Hoare, the prominent British computer scientist 
who invented quicksort.  
Select the subarray‘s first element: p = A[l].Now scan the subarray from both ends, comparing 
the subarray‘s elements to the pivot.  
The left -to-right scan, denoted below by index pointer i, starts with the second element. Since 
we want elements smaller than the pivot to be in the left part of the subarray, this scan skips over 
elements that are smaller than the pivot and stops upon en countering the first element greater than 
or equal to the pivot.  
The right -to-left scan, denoted below by index pointer j, starts with the last element of the 
subarray. Since we want elements larger than the pivot to be in the right part of the subarray , this 
scan skips over elements that are larger than the pivot and stops on encountering the first 
element smaller than or equal to the pivot.  
After both scans stop, three situations may arise, depending on whether or not 
the scanning indices have crossed .  
 If scanning indices i and j have not crossed, i.e., i< j, we simply exchange 
A[i] and A[j ] and resume the scans by incrementing I and decrementing j, 
respectively: 
 
                   If the scanning indices have crossed over, i.e., i>  
j, we will have partitioned the subarray after exchanging the pivot with 
A[j]: 
 
If the scanning indices stop while pointing to the same element, i.e., i = j, the 
value they are pointing to must be equal to p. Thus, we have the subarray 
partitioned, with the split position s = i = j :  
 
 
 
 
Analysis  
Best Case -Here the basic operation is key comparison. Number of key 
comparisons made before a partition is achieved is n + 1 if the scanning indices 
cross over and n if they coincide. If all the splits happe n in the middle of 
corresponding subarrays, we will have the best case. The number of key 
comparisons in the best case satisfies the recurrence,  
 
According to the Master Theorem, Cbest(n) ∈Θ(n log 2 n); solving it exactly for n = 
2k yields  
Cbest(n) = n log2 n.  
Worst Case – In the worst case, all the splits will be skewed to the extreme: one 
of the two subarrays will be empty, and the size of the other will be just 1 less 
than the size of the subarray being partitioned. This unfortunate situation will 
happen, in particular, for increasing arrays. Indeed, if A[0..n − 1] is a strictly 
increasing array and we use A[0] as the pivot, the left -to-right scan will stop on 
A[1] while the right -to-left scan will go all the way to reach A[0], indicating the 
split at  position 0:So, after making n + 1 comparisons to get to this partition 
and exchanging the pivot A[0] with itself, the algorithm will be left with the 
strictly increasing array A[1..n − 1] to sort. This sorting of strictly increasing 
arrays of diminishing sizes will continue until the last one A[n−2.. n−1] has 
been processed. The total number of key comparisons made will be equal to  
 
Average Case - Let C avg(n) be the average number of key comparisons made by 
quicksort on a randomly ordered array of size n . A partition can happen in any 
position s (0 ≤ s ≤ n− 1) after n+1comparisons are made to achieve the partition. 
After the  partition, the left and right subarrays will have s and n − 1− s 
elements, respectively. Assuming that the partition split can happen  in each 
position s with the same probability 1/n, we get the following recurrence 
relation:  
  
Its solution, which is much trickier than the worst - and best -case analyses, 
turns out to be  
  
Thus, on the average, quicksort makes only 39% more comp arisons  than in the 
best case. Moreover, its innermost loop is so efficient that it usually  runs faster 
than mergesort on randomly ordered arrays of nontrivial sizes. This certainly 
justifies the name given to the algorithm by its inventor.  
 
Variations: Because o f quicksort‟s importance, there have been persistent 
efforts over the years to refine the basic algorithm. Among several 
improvements discovered by researchers are:  
Better pivot selection methods such as randomize d quicksort that uses a 
random element or the median -of-three method that uses the median of the 
leftmost, rightmost, and the middle element of the array  
Switching to insertion sort on very small subarrays (between 5 and 15 
elements for most computer systems) or not sorting small sub arrays at all and 
finishing the algorithm with insertion sort applied to the entire nearly sorted 
array  
Modifications of the partitioning algorithm such as the three -way partition into 
segments smaller than, equal to, and larger than the pivot  
 
Limitat ions: 1. It is not stable. 2. It requires a stack to store parameters of 
subarrays that are yet to be sorted. 3. While Performance on randomly ordered 
arrays is known to be sensitive not only to the implementation details of the 
algorithm but also to both computer architecture and data type . 
 
 
Unit - 4 
Greedy Method : The General Method – Optimal Storage on Tapes – Knapsack Problem – Job 
Sequencing with Deadlines – Optimal Merge Patterns . 
GENERAL METHOD  
Greedy Method  
Greedy is the most straight forward design technique. Most of the problems have n 
inputs and require us to obtain a subset that satisfies some constraints. Any subset that 
satisfies th ese constraints is called a feasible solution. We need to find a feasible solution 
that either maximizes or minimizes the objective function. A feasible solution that does 
this is called an optimal solution.  
The greedy method is a simple strategy of progr essively building up a solution, one 
element at a time, by choosing the best possible element at each stage. At each stage, a 
decision is made regarding whether or not a particular input is in an optimal solution. 
This is done by considering the inputs in an order determined by some selection 
procedure. If the inclusion of the next input, into the partially constructed optimal 
solution will result in an infeasible solution then this input is not added to the partial 
solution. The selection procedure itself is based on some optimization measure. Several 
optimization measures are plausible for a given problem. Most of them, however, will 
result in algorithms that generate sub -optimal solutions. This version of greedy 
technique is called subset paradigm . Some problems like Knapsack, Job sequencing with 
deadlines and minimum cost spanning trees are based on subset paradigm.  
For the problems that make decisions by considering the inputs in some order, each 
decision is made using an optimization criterion that can be computed using decisions 
already made. This version of greedy method is ordering paradigm . Some problems like 
optimal storage on tapes, optimal merge patterns and single source shortest path are 
based on ordering paradigm.  
 
CONTROL ABSTRACTION   
Algorithm Greedy (a, n)  
// a(1 : n) contains the „n‟ inputs  
{  
solution := 
 ; // initialize the solution to empty for i:=1 to n do  
{  
x := select (a);  
if feasible (solution, x) then  
solution := Union (Solution, x);  
}  
return solution;  
}  Procedure  Greedy describes the essential way that a greedy based algorithm will look, 
once a particular problem is chosen and the functions select, feasible and union are 
properly implemented.  
The function select selects an input from „a‟, removes it and assigns i ts value to „x‟. Feasible is a 
Boolean valued function, which determines if „x‟ can be included into the solution vector. The 
function Union combines „x‟ with solution and updates the objective function.  
KNAPSACK PROBLEM  
Let us apply the greedy method to solve the knapsack problem. We are given „n‟ objects 
and a knapsack. The object „i‟ has a weight w i and the knapsack has a capacity „m‟. If a 
fraction x i, 0 < x i < 1 of object i is placed into the knapsack then a profit of p i xi is 
earned. The objective is  to fill the knapsack that maximizes the total profit earned.  
Since the knapsack capacity is „m‟, we require the total weight of all chosen objects to be at 
most „m‟. The problem is stated as:  
 
The profits and weights are positive numbers.  
Algorithm  
If the objects are already been sorted into non -increasing order of p[i] / w[i] then the 
algorithm given below obtains solutions corresponding to this strategy.  
 
Algorithm GreedyKnapsack (m, n)  
// P[1 : n] and w[1 : n] c ontain the profits and weights respectively of  
// Objects ordered so that p[i] / w[i] > p[i + 1] / w[i + 1].  
// m is the knapsack size and x[1: n] is the solution vector.  
{  
for i := 1 to n do x[i] := 0.0 // initialize x U := m;  
for i := 1 to n do  
{  
if (w(i) > U) then break;  
x [i] := 1.0; U := U – w[i];  
}  
if (i < n) then x[i] := U / w[i];  
}  
Running time:  
The objects are to be sorted into non -decreasing order of p i / wi ratio. But if we disregard 
the time to initially sort the objects, the algorithm requires only O(n) time.  
Example:  
Consider the following instance of the knapsack problem: n = 3, m = 20, (p 1, p2, p3) = (25, 24, 
15) and (w 1, w2, w3) = (18, 15, 10).  
 
 OPTIMAL STORAGE ON  TAPES  
There are „n‟ programs that are to be stored on a computer tape of length „L‟. Each 
program „i‟ is of length l i, 1 ≤ i ≤ n. All the programs can be stored on the tape if and 
only if the sum of the lengths of the programs is at most „L‟.  
We shall a ssume that whenever a program is to be retrieved from this tape, the tape is 
initially positioned at the front. If the programs are stored in the order i = i 1, i2, . . . . .  
, in, the time t J needed to retrieve program i J is proportional to  
 
 
 
 
Example  
Let n = 3, (l 1, l2, l3) = (5, 10, 3). Then find the optimal ordering?  
Solution:  
There are n! = 6 possible orderings. They are:  
 
 
Algorithm:  
The algorithm for assigning programs to tapes is as follows:  
Algorithm Store (n, m)  
// n is the number of programs and m the number of tapes  
{  
j := 0; // next tape to store on for i :=1 to n do  
{  
Print („append program‟, i, „to permutation for tape‟, j); j := (j + 1) mod m;  
}  
}  
On any given tape, the programs are stored in non -decreasing order of their lengths.  
 
 
JOB SEQUENCING WITH DEADLINES  
 
When we are given a set of „n‟ jobs. Associated with eac h Job i, deadline d i > 0 and 
profit P i > 0. For any job „i‟ the profit pi is earned iff the job is completed by its deadline. 
Only one machine is available for processing jobs. An optimal solution is the feasible 
solution with maximum profit.  
Sort the job s in „j‟ ordered by their deadlines. The array d [1 : n] is used to store the 
deadlines of the order of their p -values. The set of jobs j [1 : k] such that j [r], 1 ≤ r ≤ k 
are the jobs in „j‟ and d (j [1]) ≤ d (j[2]) ≤ . . . ≤ d (j[k]). To test whether J U {i} is 
feasible, we have just to insert i into J preserving the deadline ordering and then verify 
that d [J[r]] ≤ r, 1 ≤ r ≤ k+1.  
 
 
Example:  
Let n = 4, (P 1, P2, P3, P4,) = (100, 10, 15, 27) and (d 1 d2 d3 d4) = (2, 1, 2, 1). The  
feasible solutions and their values are:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
OPTIMAL MERGE PATERNS  
Given „n‟ sorted files, there are many ways to pair wise merge them into a single sorted 
file. As, different pairings require different amounts of computing time, we want to 
determine an optimal (i.e., one requiring the fewest comparisons) way to pair wise 
merge „n‟ sorted files together. This type of merging is called as 2 -way merge patterns. 
To merge an n -record file and an m -record file  requires possibly n + m record moves, 
the obvious choice choice is, at each step merge the two smallest files together. The 
two-way merge patterns can be represented by binary merge trees.  
 
Algorithm to Generate Two -way Merge Tree:  
 
struct treenode  
{  
  treenode * lchild;  
  treenode * rchild;  
}; 
 
Example 1:  
Suppose we are having three sorted files X 1, X2 and X 3 of length 30, 20, and 10 records each. 
Merging of the files can be carried out as follows:  
 
Example 2:  
Given five files (X1, X2, X3, X4, X5) with sizes (20, 30, 10, 5, 30). Apply greedy rule to 
find optimal way of pair wise merging to give an optimal solution using binary merge 
tree representation.  
Solution:  
 
Merge X 4 and X 3 to get 15 record moves. Call this Z 1.  
 
Merge Z 1 and X 1 to get 35 record moves. Call this Z 2.  
 
 
 
 
Unit V  
Back tracking: The General Method – The 8 -Queens Problem – Sum of Subsets – Graph Coloring .   
 
 Backtracking  
Some problems can be solved, by exhaustive search. The exhaustive -search technique 
suggests generatin g all candidate solutions and then identifying the one (or the ones) with a 
desired property.  
Backtracking is a more intelligent variation of this approach. The principal idea is to 
construct solutions one component at a time and evaluate such partially c onstructed 
candidates as follows. If a partially constructed solution can be developed further without 
violating the problem‘s constraints, it is done by taking the first remaining legitimate option 
for the next component. If there is no legitimate option for the next component, no 
alternatives for any remaining component need to be considered. In this case, the algorithm 
backtracks to replace the last component of the partially constructed solution with its next 
option.  
It is convenient to implement this kind of processing by constructing a tree of choices being 
made, called the state -space tree . Its root represents an initial state before the search for a 
solution begins. The nodes of the first level in the tree represent t he choices made for the first 
component of a solution; the nodes of the second level represent the choices for the second 
component, and soon. A node in a state -space tree is said to be promising if it corresponds to 
a partially constructed solution that m ay still lead to a complete solution; otherwise, it is 
called non-promising . Leaves represent either non -promising dead ends or complete 
solutions found by the algorithm.  
In the majority of cases, a state space tree for a backtracking algorithm is constru cted in the 
manner of depth -first search. If the current node is promising, its child is generated by adding 
the first remaining legitimate option for the next component of a solution, and the processing 
moves to this child. If the current node turns out t o be non -promising, the algorithm 
backtracks to the node‘s parent to consider the next possible option for its last component; if 
there is no such option, it backtracks one more level up the tree, and so on. Finally, if the 
algorithm reaches a complete sol ution to the problem, it either stops (if just one solution is 
required) or continues searching for other possible solutions.  
 
General method  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
General Algorithm (Recursive)  
 
 
General Algorithm (Iterative)  
 
  General Algorithm for backtracking  
 
 
N-Queens problem  
The problem is to place n queens on an n × n chessboard so that no two queens attack each other 
by being in the same row or in the same column or on the same diagonal.  
So let us consider the four-queens problem and solve it by the backtracking technique. Since each of the 
four queens has to be placed in its own row, all we need to do is to assign a column for each queen on the 
board presented in figure.  
 
We start with the empty board and then place queen 1 in the first possible position of its row, which is 
in column 1 of row 1. Then we place queen 2, after trying unsuccessfully columns 1 and 2, in the first 
acceptable position for it, which is square (2, 3), the square in row 2 and column 3. This proves to be a 
dead end because there is no acceptable position for queen 3. So, the algo rithm backtracks and puts 
queen 2 in the next possible position at (2, 4). Then queen 3 is placed at (3, 2), which proves to be 
another dead end. The algorithm then backtracks all the way to queen 1 and moves it to (1, 2). Queen 2 
then goes to (2, 4), quee n 3 to(3, 1), and queen 4 to (4, 3), which is a solution to the problem. The state -
space tree of this search is shown in figure.  
 
 
Figure: State -space tree of solving the four -queens problem by backtracking. × denotes an  
unsuccessful attempt to place a queen in the indicated column. The numbers above the nodes indicate 
the order in which the nodes are generated.  
If other solutions need to be found, the algorithm can simply resume its operations at the leaf at 
which it st opped. Alternatively, we can use the board‘s symmetry for this purpose.  
Finally, it should be pointed out that a single solution to the n -queens problem for any n ≥ 4 can 
be found in linear time .  
Note: The algorithm NQueens() is not in the syllabus. It i s given here for interested learners. The 
algorithm is referred from textbook T2.  
 
 
 
 
 
 Sum of subsets problem  
Problem definition: Find a subset of a given set A = {a 1, . . . , a n} of n positive integers whose 
sum is equal to a given positive integer d.  
For example, for A = {1, 2, 5, 6, 8} and d = 9, there are two solutions: {1, 2, 6} and {1, 8}. Of 
course, some instances of this problem may have no solutions.  
It is convenient to  sort the set‘s elements in increasing order. So, we will assume that  
a1< a2< . . . < a n.  
The state -space tree can be constructed as a binary tree like that in Figure shown below for the 
instance A = {3, 5, 6, 7} and d = 15.  
The number inside a node is the sum of the elements already included in the subsets represented by the 
node. The inequality below a leaf indicates the reason for its termination.  
 
 
 
 
The root of the tree represents the starting point, with no deci sions about the given elements made 
as yet. Its left and right children represent, respectively, inclusion and exclusion of a 1 in a set 
being sought.  
Similarly, going to the left from a node of the first level corresponds to inclusion of a 2 while 
going to  the right corresponds to its exclusion, and so on. Thus, a path from the root to a node on 
the i th level of the tree indicates which of the first in numbers have been included in the subsets 
represented by that node.  
We record the value of s, the sum of these numbers, in the node. If s is equal to d, we have a solution to 
the problem. We can either report this result and stop or, if all the solutions need to be found, continue by 
backtracking to the node‘s parent. If s is not equal to d, we can terminate the node as non -promising if 
either of the following two inequalities holds:  
 
Example: Apply backtracking to solve the following instance of the subset sum problem: A  
= {1, 3, 4, 5} and d = 11.  
 
Graph coloring  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
        
 
 
 
 
 
Analysis

